
--- PAGE 1 ---
© Ted Davis
--- PAGE 2 ---
KATHY CAWSEY
MAGIC AND REALISM: AN INTERVIEW 
WITH GUY GAVRIEL KAY
IN CANADIAN FANTASY CIRCLES, Guy Gavriel Kay needs no introduc -
tion. The bestselling author regularly makes lists of both best Canadian au -
thors and best fantasy authors. While he has published some poetry, he is 
best known for his fantasy novels (fourteen to date, with another to be pub-
lished in 2022), yet the category “fantasy” doesn’t sit well with him. Indeed, 
he is rather notorious for resisting genre labels and pigeonholes. Many of 
his works could equally be called historical fiction because they are thor -
oughly researched and based on real times, places, and people, except they 
also contain magic and made-up places. The magic, however, is of a specific 
kind.
 In this year’s J. R. R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature, broadcast 
live from Toronto to Pembroke College, Oxford, Kay discussed his attitude 
to magic, which has developed over the course of his career. His works con-
tain a kind of magic that is not random or merely fantastic but arises out of 
the real beliefs of a society in a particular time and place. This explains why 
his novels do not have a consistent level of magic; rather, the amount of 
magic in a novel, be it spells or curses or magical objects or fantastic beings 
like ghosts or angels, is entirely dependent upon the historical beliefs and 
myths of the societies on which that novel is based.
 Kay’s career shows that he did not always have this attitude but gradual-
ly worked it out over time as he settled into—indeed, created—his own genre 
of writing. His first trilogy, marking his entrance into the ranks of fantasy 
writers, began with the novel The Summer Tree (1984), which fell squarely 
within the “high fantasy” tradition established by Tolkien and the Inklings. 
As fans of Kay know, he spent a year working with Christopher Tolkien on 
Tolkien’s papers and The Silmarillion  (1977). Clearly—and Kay has been 
frank about this fact—his experience editing The Silmarillion was forma -
--- PAGE 3 ---
308 The Dalhousie Review
tive for this trilogy, collectively known as The Fionavar Tapestry , which 
was written in Tolkien’s tradition of high fantasy yet without being strictly 
derivative or “Tolkienesque.” The magical aspects of Fionavar are typical 
fantasy: mages, magical objects, dragons, dwarves, flying unicorns, earth 
magic, sky magic, etc. Gods walk the earth, and humans sacrifice themselves 
in ritualistic ways to save the world in an epic battle between light and dark. 
Drawing on the same mythological traditions that Tolkien drew on (Arthu -
rian legends, Norse myths, and Welsh folklore) and adding even more to the 
mix (the Paraiko have Maori names, and the tattoos of Eridu evoke Maori 
moko body art), Fionavar manages to weave magic, myth, and ritual into a 
fantasy world large enough to contain them all. Some of this magic comes 
out of real traditions and myths that the cultures of Fionavar are based on, 
but much of it is imagined and invented by Kay. 
 Tigana (1990) is in many ways a half-way book. A major departure 
from the Fionavar trilogy, Tigana was Kay’s first attempt at a different sort 
of fantasy writing—one based on the history of a particular time and place. 
It was also rejected at first by his publishers, who wanted more of the same 
kind of high fantasy. The province of Tigana is on a peninsula called the 
Palm, which was loosely based on 15th-century Italy. Just as late-medieval 
Italy was fought over by Spain and France, the Peninsula of the Palm is torn 
between two warring powers, Ygrath and Barbadior, and infighting and ri -
valries between city-states preclude the possibility of collective resistance.
 In terms of its magic, however, Tigana is closer to Fionavar than to 
Kay’s later works, as the main conflict is between two powerful sorcer -
ers who divide the peninsula between them. The most important magic is 
a spell that has taken away Tigana’s name—no one who is not a native of 
the province can hear or remember the name. There is a paucity of magi -
cal creatures, but one does show up—a riselka, loosely based not on 15th-
century Italian beliefs but on Slavic mythology. So Tigana’s geography and 
cultures are rooted in real history, but its magic is fantasy.
 It is in Kay’s next books, A Song for Arbonne  (1992) and The Lions of 
Al-Rassan (1995), that he fully makes the shift to a quasi-historical, quasi-
fantastic genre of fiction. A Song for Arbonne is a transposed Provence dur-
ing the 13th-century Albigensian crusade. It draws not only on the historical 
events of the period but also on real Occitan troubadours, such as Bernart 
de Ventadorn. The “magic” is limited to the rituals of one of the religions, 
largely visions; indeed, one seemingly “magical” occurrence is shown, at 
--- PAGE 4 ---
 Magic and Realism 309
the end, to be faked for political ends. The Lions of Al-Rassan  is set in the 
Christian-Jewish-Islamic cultures of 11th-century Andalusian Spain and 
has a character clearly modelled on El Cid; the only quasi-magic in that is a 
prophecy and some telepathy.
 Many reviewers, especially in the late 1990s, thus thought that Kay’s 
writing trajectory was from heavily magical high fantasy to less magic and 
more reality. But with a longer view, we can now see that’s not quite ac -
curate. A linear progression, from more magic to less magic, oversimplifies 
things. Sailing to Sarantium  (1998) and Lord of Emperors (2000), based 
on 6th-century Byzantium and Justinian II but containing elements of the 
later First Iconoclasm struggles, contains some broadly defined “magic,” 
such as a telepathic talking mechanical bird and angels from a pagan god. 
Likewise, The Last Light of the Sun (2004) has a lot more magic than earlier 
works like A Song for Arbonne or The Lions of Al-Rassan. So why the shift 
back to magic?
 The Last Light of the Sun  may provide an answer. The three main cul -
tures in the book—the Erlings, the Anglcyn, and the Cyngael—are based 
on three historical cultures: the Norse Vikings, the English under King Al -
fred, and the Welsh. The magical elements are concentrated in the parts 
that take place in the lands of the Cyngael. Historically, Celtic Welsh culture 
held much stronger beliefs in the Otherworld and faeries than the German-
ic Angles or Norse. Kay, therefore, only uses the magics and supernatural 
creatures that were believed in—whether fully or not—by 9th-century Welsh 
people. Likewise, while we know that crafted animated birds are purely me-
chanical creatures, to people in 6th-century Mediterranean they must have 
seemed magical, and so the mechanical birds in Sailing to Sarantium  are 
created using actual, sacrificed, souls.
 “It’s a way of diminishing the smugness we so often bring to the beliefs 
of the past,” Kay says in the Tolkien lecture. There is no suggestion “that this 
worldview is quaint, folkloric, or superstitious.” When you’re reading The 
Last Light of the Sun, you believe in uncanny faeries and a sometimes omi-
nous fairy queen. When you’re in Kay’s parallel world to 8th-century China 
under the Tang Dynasty, in Under Heaven (2010), you not only believe in 
ghosts but know that they will haunt a place until they are properly buried. 
You believe these things because the characters believe them, and the char-
acters draw you into their worldview.
 Except for Ysabel (2007), which is set in present-day France but in the 
--- PAGE 5 ---
310 The Dalhousie Review
Fionavar universe, the rest of Kay’s works follow this general rule: they only 
contain elements of the supernatural that the original societies would have 
believed or at least half-believed. Most of Kay’s books after Fionavar also 
buck the trends of the fantasy genre by being stand-alone novels (Sailing to 
Sarantium and Lord of Emperors are the exceptions). In recent years (Kay 
has a pretty steady three-year cycle of producing books) he has returned to 
the world of Sailing to Sarantium, Lord of Emperors, The Last Light of the 
Sun, and The Lions of Al-Rassan with the novels Children of Earth and Sky 
(2016), which is set in late 15th-century Dubrovnik, Italy, and the Adriatic 
Sea, and A Brightness Long Ago (2019), which is set in the same locations 
in the mid-15th century. Again, different cultures meet, clash, trade, and 
merge, and the supernatural appears primarily in the form of ghosts and 
dreams, which makes manifest what the people of the place and time would 
have believed.
 Kay, in his books, does what I try to do in my classes: show the beliefs 
and assumptions of a time period from the inside-out, which clarifies to stu-
dents that they would have believed the same things if they had been born in 
the same culture. This inside-out approach explains the title of Kay’s Tolkien 
Lecture: “Just Enough Light: Some Thoughts on Fantasy and Literature.” 
He also quoted Walter Bagehot, who said that “we must not let daylight in 
upon magic.” Bagehot was referring to the “magic” of British royalty and 
politics, but Kay adapts the saying to explain why he leaves the exact details 
of the workings of magic unexplained in his works. Some fantasy writers, of 
course, do the opposite by detailing the nuts-and-bolts of magic in almost 
scientific fashion, but Kay believes the mystery and power of magic is lost 
with such explanations. Moreover, keeping the readers in the dark about 
how magic actually works is part of portraying the characters’ worlds from 
the inside-out. The characters would not question or analyze their beliefs, 
and so neither do the readers.
 Whether it is medieval China, Alfredian England, or Justinian Byzan -
tium, readers of Kay are immersed not only in the historical details of the 
times—objects, geography, military practices, etc.—but in their attitudes 
and worldviews. Kay says in the Tolkien lecture that the setting “renders 
these beliefs as true.” I would add that the characters also reinforce the truth 
of the beliefs. When reading his novels, it is impossible to feel superior to 
or patronizing of the characters’ worldviews or assumptions, the way you 
might if you read about them in a history textbook. You have been those 
--- PAGE 6 ---
 Magic and Realism 311
people and cared about them, so you cannot remain distanced from them.
 The following interview was conducted over email in 2021.
Kathy Cawsey: For people who aren’t familiar with you and your work, 
could you talk about how you first became interested in writing? You trained 
as a lawyer, correct? When did you start thinking of yourself as a writer?
Guy Gavriel Kay: I always wanted to write, and I did write poetry in high 
school and as an undergraduate. My first publications and awards were for 
poetry. But at the same time, I’m an oldest son from the prairies, and who 
makes a living writing in Canada? I did allow myself a year off after finishing 
law school to see if I could write a novel and did the only practical thing and 
went to Greece to do it (Leonard Cohen, Irving Layton, exemplars!). That 
book (a picaresque, innocents abroad novel) was never published, but an 
agent sent it to several houses in New York, and the responses were hugely 
encouraging (I was only 24!). That did give me a sense that maybe I can do 
this. The next thing, which we submitted two years later, was the first part of 
The Summer Tree. Based on that, the trilogy sold in London, Toronto, and 
New York. I still kept my day job (I was Associate Producer of CBC’s The 
Scales of Justice by then), but I did realize that I could write fiction and that, 
indeed, I had to. I had a contract!
Cawsey: Aside from the “high fantasy” influence of Tolkien, what other 
works are in the background of The Fionavar Tapestry?
Kay: James George Frazer’s The Golden Bough (1890), Robert Graves’ The 
White Goddess (1948), Joseph Campbell, The Mabinogion (1840), Thomas 
Malory, The Poetic Edda. I was so much steeped in myth, legend, and folk -
lore at that time. The trilogy is infused with it. 
Cawsey: Do any of these works still influence your writing today?
Kay: Less so, in any direct way, though they are still a part of my mental 
framing of many things. That doesn’t go away. I became more engaged by 
history than by folkloric variations, but history of course includes myth and 
legend.
--- PAGE 7 ---
312 The Dalhousie Review
Cawsey: You’ve said quite often that you don’t really like the term “fan -
tasy,” at least as applied to yourself, and you are quite unique for the kinds 
of books you write, which are part historical fiction and part fantasy. How 
would you describe the books that you write, and what draws you to that 
genre?
Kay: I actually don’t like any literary labels much! That goes way back to a 
university paper on William Shakespeare’s Troilus and Cressida  (1609). I 
went into the campus library and pulled out seven or eight books of essays 
on it to prepare and found the play listed among his “problem comedies” 
and his “problem tragedies”—with savagely hilarious vituperation in the 
academic brawls over which applied. I ended up writing a “plague on both 
their houses” paper and have, ever since, felt that slots, categories, genres, 
and labels can obscure more often than they illuminate. Complicating it, in 
my own writing, is that you are correct, I suppose: I don’t sit easily in any 
category. I’m all right with that. I prefer to be known for blurring boundar -
ies in this way.
Cawsey: The Arthur legendarium, especially Malory, was a major influence 
on The Fionavar Tapestry , and then you seemed to leave that behind, yet 
you recently published a poem about Merlin and Nimue in The Medieval 
Magazine. Can you explain or explore that enduring appeal (one shared 
with so many others)?
Kay: It isn’t so much a matter of leaving something behind. It is about two 
things, for me. One is having said what I feel I want to say on a subject, being 
the Arthurian triangle or traditional epic fantasy. It may very well be com -
mercially useful to stay with something that has worked in the marketplace, 
but I find it creatively problematic. I need to be energized and challenged 
when I write. New things are what does that. Beyond that, as we grow, age, 
and change, we become interested—or perhaps I even mean we should be -
come interested—in new and different things, and our art will (or should) 
evolve to embrace that.
Cawsey: In returning to this material in the recent poem, how are you ex -
ploring it in new or different ways? Or, to ask the question in a slightly dif -
ferent way, what “energized and challenged” you this time around?
--- PAGE 8 ---
 Magic and Realism 313
Kay: There are many variations of the Merlin and Nimue story, including 
different names for her and diverse settings in England and France. I think 
this particular poem has its origins in a trip I took to Brittany, which of 
course is profoundly imbued with Celts and Arthuriana. I was a guest for a 
day at the Arthurian Centre in their castle on the edge of the forest of Bro -
celiande, and I took a guided walk through the forest with one of the people 
coordinating their lecture series and year-round events. But, because art is 
usually not a straight line, it was months and months before the specific idea 
and tone of a poem emerged, long after I was back home. 
Cawsey: When I was teaching a Canadian literature course in Hungary, I 
taught Tigana using Robert Kroetsch’s essay “No Name is My Name,” which 
argues that many traditional Canadian novels have a nameless protagonist 
and that the quintessence of being Canadian is namelessness. His argument 
seemed to provide a perfect description of the central plot of Tigana! Is 
there a way in which your exotic, international, fantastic novels that seem to 
be set in Greece, Byzantium, or Italy are really about Canada?
Kay: Actually, no. In my case, Tigana was the book where I began to think a 
lot about an underexplored strength of the fantastic: how it can universalize 
a theme. The idea of erasing the culture and identity of a conquered or sub-
jugated people has long been a tool of tyranny. Examples are so widespread, 
in history and our own times, that when I’ve done book tours around the 
world I am often asked: “When you wrote Tigana, were you writing about 
us?” That question, for me, is a marker of what I wanted to achieve. Certain-
ly in Quebec there is a real sense of identifying with the idea of a beleaguered 
culture and language, but that is true—and that is precisely my point—in so 
many places and times.
Cawsey: Could expand on that a bit? In what way does your kind of fantasy 
enable the universalization of a theme?
Kay: I think the absence of a specific time and place can cause a reader to be 
able to see a story as not tied to, not solely about, a particular time and place. 
So it is the very fact of being in an invented setting that does this. A reader 
can’t, if it is done right, avoid addressing the wider possibilities of, for ex -
ample, the endless, ubiquitous actions of occupying powers, as in Tigana.
--- PAGE 9 ---
314 The Dalhousie Review
Cawsey: Is there anything lost in that universalization?
Kay: Yes, I think so. From the writer’s point of view, you can gain and lose 
readers! There will always be those who want a novel to “educate” them 
about the events surrounding the Treaty of Utrecht or the fall of Muslim 
Spain. These readers can find this shift into an invented setting frustrating. 
I suppose the technique can also relinquish the intensity of specific events 
and histories in exchange for a different sort of intensity of reading experi -
ence. But, really, there are a lot of novels that seek (with varying degrees 
of success or accuracy) to capture real events. I suppose I like aiming for a 
different thing.
Cawsey: The religions of the Jaddites, Kindath, and Asharites, which run 
through quite a few of your books, pretty obviously calque onto Christianity, 
Judaism, and Islam. You have said that you don’t outline very much and 
that writing is a process of discovery for you as you are creating. Did you dis-
cover anything surprising or unexpected in writing about these religions?
Kay: What I wanted to do was explore the dynamics of religious difference, 
and hostilities, not the elements or beliefs of any actual faith in our world. 
These three invented faiths started, as you know, with The Lions of Al-Ras-
san, and then I stayed with the three of them when I came to write Sailing 
to Sarantium and Lord of Emperors because one of the faiths worships the 
sun—a god of light! My protagonist in these novels was also a mosaicist, 
and my reading into the art form made it so clear that it is an art form that 
uses light in such compelling ways. To not stay with that religion—and thus 
also keep the other two—felt as if it would be a terrible missed opportunity. 
So that counts as a surprise because I hadn’t planned to do this when I first 
began researching Byzantium.
Cawsey: It was really thought-provoking in The Lions of Al-Rassan  how 
personal friendships, loves, and loyalties crashed up against religious be -
liefs and loyalties (and political commitments, I might add). Could you talk 
a little about that? Does that dynamic carry over into other novels?
Kay: I am profoundly interested in bringing “great events” down to the per-
sonal level, so yes, this idea of the personal runs through much of my fiction. 
--- PAGE 10 ---
 Magic and Realism 315
The death of the emperor far off means far less to a farmer than the broken 
leg of his hired hand at harvest time (Yeats wrote about this) or a first kiss 
on that same day between two young people in a village. In The Lions of 
Al-Rassan I was specifically exploring how holy war, or any major conflict, 
can take away the space for people to make their own decisions as to friend-
ship or love—even important people. You become caught up in the sweep of 
events—a cog in the turning of those gears.
Cawsey: You are one of the relatively few authors I know of who seems 
aware of the complexities of religious belief—how some people believe in 
an unquestioning, fanatical way and feel no need to question their beliefs, 
while others have a deep need to question their beliefs or don’t believe at 
all but take comfort in the rituals of their tradition. Is this something you 
deliberately set out to do? Where does this come from?
Kay: In truth, I suspect it comes from the same place that your own re -
sponse, and other readers’ responses, come from: thinking about these mat-
ters, especially in a historical context. I really am anchored, to an extreme 
degree, in reading and considering aspects of many times and places—how 
they differ from each other and from our own times. I also have a drive to -
wards complexity, I think—even towards celebrating it. That can, as a side -
note, cut hard against the cultural tendencies of our own day, but I don’t 
mind that either.
Cawsey: Yes, I think that the complexity or even contradiction—the way 
real lives are lived—is something your readers appreciate in your writing. 
Does the “reading and brooding” you do on the historical context add to this 
complexity or contain it in some way by making it manageable?
Kay: All of the above at various times and in various situations! 
Cawsey: How important is historical accuracy? Most readers would think 
that a strange question—you are “making up” entire worlds, after all—but I 
suspect that historical research and context matters a lot.
Kay: Here’s a story about that. When I was researching Under Heaven, my 
novel inspired by Tang China and the An Lushan Rebellion, I was in touch 
--- PAGE 11 ---
316 The Dalhousie Review
with many Asian Studies academics (and one brilliant pipa player!). I had 
lunch with one such academic to throw questions at her. Partway through 
she shook her head and said, “I don’t get it! This is a fantasy, right? Why 
do you care what really happened?” It was a complete miss as to my own 
process, which is very much as you imply with the question. Later, another 
academic in the field, who by good fortune happened to be a lifetime reader 
of my work, was steered to me (by the one I had lunch with!). As a reader, 
knowing the books, she completely got my methods and my desire to learn 
the historical reality as much as possible. I have often said that if you are go-
ing to do variations on a theme, you need to try to know the theme.
Cawsey: Looking back over the arc of your writing—if there is one—does 
there seem to be a progression or development in the themes that you’re 
exploring? I’m thinking in particular of the concept of free will vs. destiny, 
which is a major thread (pun intended) of Fionavar. Free will is still pres -
ent in later works, but there seems to be a shift away from a sort of cosmic 
destiny to a more social concept of destiny, such as the expectations of one’s 
parents or superiors.
Kay: Well, certainly the movement from Fionavar through Tigana and 
then A Song for Arbonne  is a movement from myth, legend, and folklore 
towards being more directly inspired by history. But let me add something 
pretty basic: I began Fionavar in my late twenties. That’s a really long time 
ago now. Perhaps some artists have chosen to stay put for market-driven 
reasons, but isn’t there something wrong if we don’t evolve in what engages 
and compels us? I haven’t left behind my fascination with the past, but the 
past covers a lot of ground, and there are so many different themes, differ -
ent reasons for writing a book, and different things one wants to say.
Cawsey: To take another example: your earlier works often deal with the 
“movers and shakers”—gods, kings, queens, generals, lords, and leaders—
whereas A Brightness Long Ago  deals with what Ken Dryden called “the 
moved and the shaken”—that is, the people on the periphery who are affect-
ed by the decisions of kings, queens, and generals. Even your inspirations 
seem to have changed from El Cid, King Alfred, and Queen Guinevere to the 
nameless people who are caught up in big events. Is that an accurate percep-
tion, or have you always been interested in the dynamic between the two?
--- PAGE 12 ---
 Magic and Realism 317
Kay: Yes, I think that’s accurate. I’ve always been interested in this. This 
is also a theme in Shakespeare’s Henry IV and Henry V plays, which move 
between court figures and a motley crew of people (plus Falstaff!). I have, 
in recent years and books, become even more engaged by this idea of giv -
ing value to lives that often go unrecorded. This, by the way, links up and 
benefits from a major strand in the last generation or so of historians, who 
have—sometimes brilliantly—done exactly this, and who have thus provided 
me with superb research materials and inspiration!