

Guy Gavriel Kay Lecture Recording | The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature

On Tuesday May 11th, Guy Gavriel Kay delivered the eighth annual Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature at Pembroke College, Oxford, broadcasting live from Toronto in Canada. We were moved, inspired, and delighted by his lecture, ‘Just Enough Light: Some Thoughts on Fantasy and Literature.’

Our thanks again to Guy for spending time with us. It was also wonderful to see so many people attend the lecture live, both on Youtube and Zoom.

If you missed the lecture, or want to watch it again, the recording is available here:

Photographs 

We’d love to see more photos of people watching the lecture from around the world… share them with us on social media, and we’ll add them to this post! 

Roma Prudente, watching live from Toronto, Canada

Maria Dahvana Headley, watching live from North Carolina

Behind the scenes managing the simulcast on Zoom and Youtube

Write-ups

Cheryl Morgan, Cheryl’s Mewsings

Andrew Liptak, Tor.com

Brenton Dickieson, A Pilgrim in Narnia

Pembroke College, Oxford

Share this:

 Share on X (Opens in new window)
 X

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
 Facebook

Like Loading...

 3 thoughts on “Guy Gavriel Kay Lecture Recording” 

Thank you, I’ll watch this presently. Couldn’t watch at the time so this is very welcome. 

 Reply ↓ 

Pingback: The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature – BrightWeavings 

Pingback: Mid-week stuff – folkelore 

Leave a comment Cancel reply

Δ

Support the Tolkien Lecture

We run entirely on donations from Pembroke Alumni and the public.

 Donate Now

Follow us 

 Type your email… 

 Subscribe 

Instagram

Bluesky

Facebook

X

Spotify

YouTube

Kindly Supported By

and

The Kadas Family Charitable Foundation

Recent Posts

 ‘On Fantasy’ by Brandon Sanderson – Lecture Recording

 Tickets for the 2026 Tolkien Lecture, delivered by Brandon Sanderson

 Brandon Sanderson to Deliver the 2026 Tolkien Lecture

 Listen now: The Tolkien Lecture Podcast!

 ‘The Uses of Fantasy’–Zen Cho Lecture Recording

 Comment 

 Reblog

 Subscribe

 Subscribed

 The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature 

Join 393 other subscribers

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 The J.R.R. Tolkien Lecture on Fantasy Literature 

 Subscribe

 Subscribed

Sign up

Log in

 Copy shortlink

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions

Collapse this bar

 Loading Comments...

 Write a Comment...

 Email (Required)

 Name (Required)

 Website

%d

