 SciFi and Fantasy Book Club - Members' Chat: Guy Gavriel Kay: Where should I start? Showing 1-15 of 15 Home My Books Browse ▾ Recommendations Choice Awards Genres Giveaways New Releases Lists Explore News & Interviews Genres Art Biography Business Children's Christian Classics Comics Cookbooks Ebooks Fantasy Fiction Graphic Novels Historical Fiction History Horror Memoir Music Mystery Nonfiction Poetry Psychology Romance Science Science Fiction Self Help Sports Thriller Travel Young Adult More Genres Community ▾ Groups Quotes Ask the Author Sign In Join Sign up View profile Profile Friends Groups Discussions Comments Reading Challenge Kindle Notes & Highlights Quotes Favorite genres Friends’ recommendations Account settings Help Sign out Home My Books Browse ▾ Recommendations Choice Awards Genres Giveaways New Releases Lists Explore News & Interviews Genres Art Biography Business Children's Christian Classics Comics Cookbooks Ebooks Fantasy Fiction Graphic Novels Historical Fiction History Horror Memoir Music Mystery Nonfiction Poetry Psychology Romance Science Science Fiction Self Help Sports Thriller Travel Young Adult More Genres Community ▾ Groups Quotes Ask the Author SciFi and Fantasy Book Club discussion This topic is about Guy Gavriel Kay 331 views Members' Chat > Guy Gavriel Kay: Where should I start? Comments Showing 1-15 of 15 (15 new)    post a comment » date    newest » message 1: by Lemon (new) May 30, 2011 07:14PM Hey everyone, I hope I'm posting this in the right section. I keep hearing I should read some GGK, but I'm not sure which of his books I should try first. Any suggestions? For the record, I typically prefer character-driven fantasy to plot-driven. Not sure which category his books fall into. reply | flag message 2: by new_user (new) May 30, 2011 07:16PM The Lions of al-Rassan was fantastic, Sarah, and I've heard people say his best. The ending will make you cry. I would say his books are character-driven, definitely. His characters aren't one-dimensional, and their inner struggles are more important than obtaining x relic or defeating so-and-so. It's not boy/quest either. reply | flag message 3: by [deleted user] (last edited May 30, 2011 07:47PM) (new) May 30, 2011 07:46PM Well, as a group we'll be reading his book The Summer Tree in June. It's the start of his Fionavar Trilogy. You could join us for that :) If not, I'll go ahead and second Lions. I've only read it and Tigana so far and enjoyed them both, but Lions was better. eta: Went ahead and removed the duplicate thread, just an fyi for ya. reply | flag message 4: by [deleted user] (last edited May 30, 2011 09:42PM) (new) May 30, 2011 09:42PM I'm the nay-sayer. Forgive me, but I wasn't too crazy about his stuff. He writes better than I ever could, but for me his books were more smoke than fire. He comes right up to the line of greatness, but never crosses it. That's just my opinion of course; I'm not the Burning Bush. The Last Light of the Sun had some good characters in it, but it also had far too many characters in it. It was also far too preachy. Even when he had a really good point to make, I just wanted him to stop laying down The Word and just get on with the story. Under Heaven was much better, but by the time I was half way through, I was looking forward to finishing it and moving on to something else. There are moments his writing really flighs high, but those moments didn't come enough for me. I'm not saying you won't like his books, but I think there are better writers out there, like Gene Wolfe or Glen Cook. reply | flag message 5: by Valerie (new) May 30, 2011 09:53PM I haven't read any of his stuff yet, either, but I picked up Sailing to Sarantium (which is one that I've noticed people never seem to mention) a few weeks ago and shall be getting to it soon. :) reply | flag message 6: by Caleb (new) May 30, 2011 10:15PM I've only read Tigana and I was blown away. I've always been meaning to read more of his work but have never got any of his books at the top of my very long list. reply | flag message 7: by Colin (new) May 31, 2011 06:12AM I've wanted to try his stuff for a long while, but never got around to it. Thanks for posting the original question Sarah, and thanks to everyone else for answering! reply | flag message 8: by Caleb (new) May 31, 2011 06:27AM Talking of another author who's there on my list but not read yet. Colin, I have Fall of Ossard in my bookshelf, but like lots of my paperbacks, I haven't got it yet. reply | flag message 9: by Genia (new) May 31, 2011 06:31AM I think in the case of GGK, it's best to begin at the beginning. Start with The Finavar Tapestry, then read his alternate history books: Tigana, A Song for Arbonne and Lions of Al-Rassan, Last Light of the Sun and the Sarantine Mosaic. Finish off with Ysabel. reply | flag message 10: by Genia (new) May 31, 2011 08:15AM Well, I wasn't trying to be 100% precise... reply | flag message 11: by Laurel (new) May 31, 2011 08:48AM I've read and loved all of Kay's work. I believe that the characters are as rich as Robin Hobb's, the language he uses is exquisite, and I love the fantastical twist he takes on our past histories. I'm deeply biased towards all of his works! The Sarantine Mosaic duology is wonderful. Usually we see a teenage boy heading off on a life changing journey. In this case, it's a man established in his life and craft. This slight change makes for a rich and interesting story. They're a great read! Lions of Al-Rassan is hands down my favorite standalone. I love the exploration of culture, the action, but most of all, the characters. You really will want to read this over and over again! Some people dislike Fionavar because it seems too traditional of a fantasy. I don't understand this in the least. It's one of my favorite series of all time! I re-read it every single summer and cry each time. It's epic, it's lyrical, it's filled with action and romance. It's everything you could ever ask for. Under Heaven, his most recent book, has one of the most beautiful opening premises I've ever read! I was lucky enough to hear him do a reading for Under Heaven, and he explained that the book is based pin a real life family. It tells the story of a man who lives alone at the site of a great and terrible battle. To honor the memory of his father, he is burying the bones of the thousands of soldiers who perished there, putting their souls to rest. Trust me, it's amazing! Please, give Kay a try! He really is one of the greats! reply | flag message 12: by Lemon (new) May 31, 2011 10:42PM Wow, I didn't expect so many responses. I think I'll start with The Lions of al-Rassan. That seems to have the most votes and since it's a standalone it'll be a bit less of a commitment for starting out, I think. Thanks so much for all the advice, you guys! (Ala: Sorry about the duplicate. Didn't realize that had happened. Thanks for taking care of it!) reply | flag message 13: by [deleted user] (new) May 31, 2011 11:07PM Let us know how you like Lions :) And no worries, it's all part of the job ;) reply | flag message 14: by Colin (new) Jun 01, 2011 02:07AM Cheers Caleb. I hope you enjoy it. :) Sarah, like I said before, thanks for asking the question. Without the thread and input of everyone else, I could guess that I'd never quite get around to taking up GGK finally. Now I will. reply | flag message 15: by Laurel (new) Jun 01, 2011 07:30AM Can't wait to hear what you all think of Kay after the first read! reply | flag back to top post a comment » Add a reference: Book Author Search for a book to add a reference add:    link cover Author: add:    link photo Share SciFi and Fantasy Book Club Group Home Bookshelf Discussions Photos Videos Send invite Members Polls unread topics | mark unread Books mentioned in this topic Sailing to Sarantium ( other topics ) The Summer Tree ( other topics ) The Lions of Al-Rassan ( other topics ) Company About us Careers Terms Privacy Interest Based Ads Ad Preferences Your Ads Privacy Choices Help Work with us Authors Advertise Authors & ads blog Connect Mobile version © 2026 Goodreads LLC 