 Reddit - Dive into anything Advertisement Reddit and its partners use cookies and similar technologies to provide you with a better experience. By accepting all cookies, you agree to our use of cookies to deliver and maintain our services and site, improve the quality of Reddit, personalize Reddit content and advertising, and measure the effectiveness of advertising. By rejecting non-essential cookies, Reddit may still use certain cookies to ensure the proper functionality of our platform. For more information, please see our Cookie Notice and our Privacy Policy . Open menu Open navigation Go to Reddit Home r/Fantasy A chip A close button Get app Get the Reddit app Log In Log in to Reddit Expand user menu Open settings menu Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores Skip to Navigation Go to Fantasy r/Fantasy r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online • by contrasupra   Some thoughts about Tigana (heavy spoilers) false I just finished this book and to show my hand at the outset, I thought it was wonderful. Some things didn't completely land for me, like the idea of being so emotionally caught up in your homeland that the idea of it being erased would be so shattering, but it's a premise I can accept and understand. I thought the writing was lovely, the ideas intriguing, and many of the characters just powerfully charismatic. I was looking at some older threads and see a lot of discussion of Brandin and whether the book tries to "make him sympathetic" or paint him as morally gray or not a pure villain. I think this is a bizarre and really reductive take. Brandin is a bad guy. He did things we can ALL recognize as irredeemably evil. But "bad guys" or even evil guys aren't mustache-twirling cartoon villains all the time. They laugh, they have friends, they tell jokes, they fall in love, they experience the full range of the human condition beyond "I'm a bad guy and the things I do are bad." The book doesn't "make him sympathetic" so much as show him to us at times when he's not ACTIVELY doing evil things and ask us (and Dianora, in some ways) to grapple with that. Again, this doesn't make him less of a villain. It simply makes him a more interesting villain than Alberico, who truly does appear to be a one-dimensional cartoon tyrant. And I don't think the book is really trying to make us feel any particular kind of way about it - just showing it to us and saying "what do you think about this?" None of this even attempts to mitigate the things he's done or make him not an evil man! It just asks us to hold a few ideas in our heads at the same time. And it does the reverse as well! One of the most disturbing moments in the whole novel, for me, was the binding of the wizard Erlein, and it was done by Alessan, our consummate good guy. We're told he feels grief about it, but honestly, Erlein's bitterness about being enslaved (yes, enslaved) rang extremely true for me and it honestly struck me as bizarre that the protagonists seemed to find his reaction tedious. Sure, Erlein wasn't "free" before but there's a big difference between living in a conquered land and being literally magically enslaved to a single human. Does that make Alessan a bad guy? I dunno, maybe. I don't think the book is really taking a position. I'm not sure what I think about Dianora's chapters - I need to spend a little more time thinking about them. She does come across as weak in the end, although (unknown to her) she ended up being a catalyst that made everything possible. Also, she spent years sexually enslaved to a man who would have killed her if he had heard her full name. That might even be true by the end of the novel when he ostensibly loves her. Maybe it's wrong to come down on her too harshly, since she really is a victim and she'd hardly be the first prisoner to end up identifying with her captor. I don't know. It's not a perfect book but I do think it's a fascinating one with a lot of really interesting things to say. I'd love to hear what others think! Read more Popular TOPICS Gaming Valheim Genshin Impact Minecraft Pokimane Halo Infinite Call of Duty: Warzone Path of Exile Hollow Knight: Silksong Escape from Tarkov Watch Dogs: Legion Sports NFL NBA Megan Anderson Atlanta Hawks Los Angeles Lakers Boston Celtics Arsenal F.C. Philadelphia 76ers Premier League UFC Business GameStop Moderna Pfizer Johnson & Johnson AstraZeneca Walgreens Best Buy Novavax SpaceX Tesla Crypto Cardano Dogecoin Algorand Bitcoin Litecoin Basic Attention Token Bitcoin Cash Television The Real Housewives of Atlanta The Bachelor Sister Wives 90 Day Fiance Wife Swap The Amazing Race Australia Married at First Sight The Real Housewives of Dallas My 600-lb Life Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Celebrity Kim Kardashian Doja Cat Iggy Azalea Anya Taylor-Joy Jamie Lee Curtis Natalie Portman Henry Cavill Millie Bobby Brown Tom Hiddleston Keanu Reeves RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Reddit, Inc. © 2023. All rights reserved. 