 Is Tigana a good representation of Guy Gavriel Kay? : r/Fantasy Skip to main content Open menu Open navigation Go to Reddit Home r/Fantasy A chip A close button Get app Get the Reddit app Log In Log in to Reddit Expand user menu Open settings menu Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores &nbsp; &nbsp; TOPICS Internet Culture (Viral) Amazing Animals & Pets Cringe & Facepalm Funny Interesting Memes Oddly Satisfying Reddit Meta Wholesome & Heartwarming Games Action Games Adventure Games Esports Gaming Consoles & Gear Gaming News & Discussion Mobile Games Other Games Role-Playing Games Simulation Games Sports & Racing Games Strategy Games Tabletop Games Q&As Q&As Stories & Confessions Technology 3D Printing Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning Computers & Hardware Consumer Electronics DIY Electronics Programming Software & Apps Streaming Services Tech News & Discussion Virtual & Augmented Reality Pop Culture Celebrities Creators & Influencers Generations & Nostalgia Podcasts Streamers Tarot & Astrology Movies & TV Action Movies & Series Animated Movies & Series Comedy Movies & Series Crime, Mystery, & Thriller Movies & Series Documentary Movies & Series Drama Movies & Series Fantasy Movies & Series Horror Movies & Series Movie News & Discussion Reality TV Romance Movies & Series Sci-Fi Movies & Series Superhero Movies & Series TV News & Discussion RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Communities Best of Reddit Topics Content Policy Privacy Policy User Agreement Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Reddit, Inc. © 2024. All rights reserved. Copy link Copy link Go to Fantasy r/Fantasy r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online • InToddYouTrust ADMIN MOD Is Tigana a good representation of Guy Gavriel Kay? I recently read Tigana , and while I respect the quality of the prose, I have to admit that I found the book a little disappointing. There was far too much exposition for my taste, and for how much time is covered, precious little actually happened. That said, when the important moments hit, they hit especially hard due to Kay's profound understanding of language. There were some scenes I'd put pretty high on my list of favorite fantasy moments. So I guess I'd summarize my experience with Tigana as having very high highs, spread thinly across a wide plateau of just ok. So my question: is Tigana fairly representative of Guy Gavriel Kay's body of work? If it is, then I might put him on the shelf of "just not my thing," or maybe pick him up again in a few years to see if my tastes change. Archived post. New comments cannot be posted and votes cannot be cast. Share Sort by: Best Open comment sort options Best Top New Controversial Old Q&A :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > farseer4 • • It depends. It's still the same writer, so don't expect something radically different, but I could see some people liking The Lions of al Rassan, for example, more than Tigana. You won't get a continuous action fest, but I think it may be structured in a way that could be more enjoyable for you. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Normal-Average2894 • • Kay’s later books become less fantastical and more grounded in historical persons and events. He is much more interested the events proceeding great moments in history than he is in the portraying the moments themselves. He likes exploring these events from perspectives you wouldn’t find in history books and showing how seemingly small choices can compound to create great effects. He prefers long buildups to flashy payoffs. If you’re looking for consistent action I don’t think you would enjoy them. If you’re ok with slower and more meditative books that are seeped in history I think he is the best fantasy author working at the moment. Reply reply tkinsey3 • • is Tigana fairly representative of Guy Gavriel Kay's body of work? Yes and no. Kay's style has not really changed, but he has perfected it as he has written more books. I'm somewhat of a GGK newbie as well - last year I decided to finally read his work, so I started at the beginning of his bibliography (The Summer Tree) and read his work in published order. I have not finished all of it yet, but I feel like I've read enough to say that up until The Last Light of the Sun and Ysabel, he genuinely gets better with each book . Essentially, Fionavar Tapestry < Tigana < A Song for Arbonne < The Lions of Al-Rassan < The Sarantine Mosiac. So my answer is that if you enjoyed Tigana, you should read some of the following books - not even necessarily all of them! Read the blurb on them and see which one sounds more interesting to you personally. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > lordgodbird • • God I hope so. I loved it as it felt like the first fantasy I read in years that mattered, that was literary, that I'd want to read again. This is largely due to taste as I am drawn to bittersweet, melancholic media that takes itself seriously, so if this isn't your vibe Kay may not be for you. There are 2 questionable plot points, but other than that I'm a big fan. I'm working my way through his books and found Fionavar to not quite hit the mark and Song for Arbonne to be about on the same level, but Tigana is still my fav of his. Lions of al Rassan is next and I heard it's many peoples favorite. Reply reply Office-Altruistic • • Lions is ridiculously good. One of the best climaxes in fantasy, I was absolutely riveted. Followed by the most excruciatingly suspenseful epilogue I think I've ever read. Some people hate the epilogue, I thought it was genius. I consider Lions Of Al-Rassan, A Song For Arbonne and the Sarantine Mosaic essential fantasy reads. I think I need to add A Brightness Long Ago now that I think of it. I'm going to read it again, its damn good. Reply reply lorcan-mt • • I absolutely found that Brightness hit those same classic Kay notes. Reply reply More replies More replies :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > BalonSwann07 • • Eh, kinda, but not really. I've read 9 GGK books and Tigana was my least favorite. It's not very indicative of if you will like his pseudo historical stuff, but that said, his style is still largely similiar Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > fheathyr • • If you're looking for non-stop action then Kay's likely not your go to author. Gemmel's Drenai or Cook's Black Company may be more to your liking, or even Discworld if you want your action with a side of humor. Kay has a style, and with the exception of Ysabel (which he wrote with his kids) all of his books are more or less consistent. Kay's a world builder. As you read his books, you see they're all woven together into one coherent picture ... like a tapestry studded with jewels, a remarkable feat. I consider Tigana good, but not his best. I suspect each Kay fan has a different perspective; that said I've particularly enjoyed his more recent books ... the last light of the sun and all the seas of the world being perhaps top of my list. Reply reply of_mice_and_meh • • He loves exposition and slow builds. His strength is in his prose. If you’re looking for books with a ton of action he’s probably not for you. If you like beautiful language and well crafted stories and you don’t mind a slow burn, keep reading his stuff. Tigana is my favorite stand alone fantasy novel but I respect that it’s maybe not his best written work. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Lanfear_Eshonai • • I loved Tigana but I don't think its his best. Lions of Al-Rassan and the Sarantine Mosaic is better IMO. Its still the same writet though so his prose and style are similar. Reply reply solo423 • • Absolutely not. He gets exponentially better in his later books. I read his other stuff first, then came back to Tigana. It was very good, but vastly worse than his other books. A Song For Arbonne may be my favorite book of all time. It is unspeakably better than Tigana in every way. Except maybe prose which may be similar. Same with Lions of Al-Rassan. Reply reply solo423 • • Here’s my thread of me expressing the same feelings after reading Tigana after some of his better books. And plenty of people agreed with me. underwhelmed with Tigana Reply reply More replies TeeWeeHerman • • While Tigana is my personal favourite, I'm always hesitant to recommend it as a starting point for Kay. Even the "weird" subplots I sort of like. He "objectively" gets better throughout his novels. But for me, the key conceit of Tigana somehow just works for me, and the rawness of the work adds rather than subtracts to my personal experience. I also find a really large part of the enjoyment of his later novels comes from my personal interest in the historical context he is using in a particular book (e.g. Tang China for Under Heaven and Byzantine empire and Justinian for Sarantine mosaic ). That being said, your experience with Kay may not change much. The things you like will get better and better, that is, the lyrical language will still be there, the emotional punches rarely miss, you really get into the different motivations of characters that pull them in opposing directions. He researches the historical periods well and it shows in his world buidling. The plotting itself gets a bit tighter and his subplots will be much better connected to the main plot, but he's never going to be a mainly plot-driven author. Howeveer, if you like a character-driven story surrounding great historical events, Kay is your man. If you're looking for action-packed, he will not be a good match. Mind you, he can write great action scenes (chariot racing was great) but it's not his style to chain action sequences together. He likes his characters to be a little bit larger than life, even supposedly "ordinary" people will often have great observational or logic skills, let alone the great movers who (intentionally) are almost "greatness distilled" from historical records. Finally, his use of magic in his writing decreases drastically after Tigana . It's still there, usually just a very minor ability, and it's (to me) more mystical than magical. It evokes an atmosphere, it usually does come up as key to a certain plotline. But most of the time, it just simmers in the background and sometimes just shakes a character to the core, almost as if a character catches a glimp of the divine. Reply reply lorcan-mt • • I'd say that feels like a fair analysis of Tigana and Kay. It sometimes feels like there is a scale of his writing between emotional impact and writing quality (technical and pacing, etc.) that changed over time. Many fans consider Lions of Al-Rassan and Sailing to Sarantium (plus sequel) to be the sweet spot. I still go back to certain scenes in Fionavar when I feel like crying. Might be worth giving a shot to Lions or Sarantium. Of course, it could be that he will always just tell a slower story than you like, hard for me to say. Reply reply Pirkale • • I think that it should also be said that his first fantasy book series (apart from helping put The Silmarillion together), The Fionavar Tapestry, is by far his most action-packed work. It may have its flaws, but I adore it. Reply reply inarticulateblog • • I read it last year and loved it, although it does have some "written in the 80s" style flaws. I'm currently reading Tigana and am also really enjoying it. My plan was to read publication order and this discussion is making me think that's the best plan still. Reply reply More replies :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Tuga_Lissabon • • Frankly, I much prefer a song for Arbonne. Sailing to Sarantium is very good. Lions as well, for a different environment - reconquista spain. Reply reply henrythe13th • • A Song for Arbonne is so lyrical and sadly beautiful. The opening of Under Heaven just blew me away emotionally. I find his books hard to rate because I like them all for different reasons. But I agree there are common threads: lyrical prose, slow builds, emotional investment, tragedy, and also hope or renewal in many instances. Now I need to go read A Brightness Long Ago again myself! Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Tuga_Lissabon • • I don't know if you also read history; but if you don't, let me tell you that he evokes the ambiance very well. Not just the historical figures, either, there is also a general feel. And it greatly enhances those books because as you read, you are automatically filling in detail from your other knowledge and the world becomes that much richer. For example, in Sarantium - the greens and the blues? Totally historical, read about the "nike riots" if you wish to see a sample. So when you are reading the narrative, you just... fit in the historical events around you. Reply reply More replies More replies McKennaJames • • The Lions of Al-Rassan is just absolutely incredible. Far beyond Tigana. Would try that one to get a real feel for Kay at his finest. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > -Valtr • • Yeah I think you've made a pretty accurate appraisal of Kay's writing. It's pretty good for fantasy in terms of prose quality, because so many fantasy writers have bad prose, but not a lot happens in his story, especially the first fifty pages. The book is also nearly 35 years old at this point, so bear that in mind. Books in the early 90's did not get as heavily edited as they do now, and nowadays there is more expectation for a tighter story. You can already see in some of these comments the false dichotomy of, "well it's not an action fest" but books don't need constant action to be engaging, they just need ongoing conflict, which Kay struggles with. I found long sections of Tigana to be fairly boring. But I'm glad I read it, I enjoyed it and found it pretty moving. There are definitely a lot of worse books out there, as many of them make the cardinal sin of leaving the emotions off the page, and Kay doesn't make that mistake. Reply reply Abysstopheles • • He has much better books (in my opinion). Try the Sarantine Mosaic duology. Or Lions of Al Rassan. Or Song for Arbonne. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > BigDickDarrow • • I felt the exact same way you do. I thought the concept of two opposing tyrants and a secret rebellion were interesting, but there was too much exposition and what felt like filler. The book had its highlight moments, but they were few and far between. I’ve only read one other GGK novel, but I do recommend it as being much different and better than Tigana, that is: Under Heaven. It’s a bit slow to start, but I think the prose and world building makes up for it. Then the actual plot follows a pretty interesting track with good pacing, good characters, and interesting twists. It also helps that you see all of it through the main character’s eyes, as opposed to like Tigana where so much is off-screened at the expense of a cohesive narrative. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Tough_Stretch • • I'd say not exactly. His prose is usually very good in any of his books, but most of them tend to be lighter on the magic than Tigana. The stories are more realistic while retaining a little fantasy here and there. Reply reply ivor_k_hill • • I couldn't get into it either. I heard it was similar to Malazan but it didn't grab me. Reply reply tkinsey3 • • Someone gave you some bad intel, friend. I am a fan of both Kay and Erikson, but they are not similar at all, IMHO. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Due-Mycologist-7106 • • Funnily enough they both went to the same high school and eriksons older brother was in Kay’s class Reply reply tkinsey3 • • That’s amazing! Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Due-Mycologist-7106 • • Yeah a wild coincidence Reply reply more replies More replies More replies More replies ivor_k_hill • • Dang it! If I recall, the recommendation was about scope and 'atmosphere'/tone Reply reply More replies :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > lordgodbird • • Whoever told you that trolled you. Reply reply ivor_k_hill • • Maybe I should try again from an angle that isn't 'when does this become similar to Malazan?' Reply reply More replies henrythe13th • • What I find strange is they are so very different, but GGK works were the first things I enjoyed in fantasy after reading through Malazan the first time. I felt other writer’s works paled in comparison to Eriikson, and GGK, though vastly different, was just as powerful to me. It was like Yin and Yang. You can enjoy both Hardcore Metal and Classical music. Reply reply lorcan-mt • • wat Reply reply More replies KiaraTurtle • • Tigana is sort of his transition book, it’s closer to his normal style than Fionavar books but still fairly different from the rest of his historical fantasy works. For what it’s worth I’m with you on Tigana having some great highs but overall being disappointing and I love most of Kay’s books. (Tho I hate Fionavar). He does tend toward exposition but normally I enjoy it more if that makes sense? Reply reply crazyGauss42 • • I'd say yes, it's representative of his most famous and newer work in terms of style. The biggest difference, is that, there's much more magic (and this kind of ties it with the older works like Fionavarr tapestry). Stuff like Lions of Al-Rassan or Sarantime mosaic are pretty similar in writing, but are set in a world that's mostly just modified historical setting, with little to no magic. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > gorfuin • • I enjoyed Lions of Al-Rassan more than Tigana. It was more grounded in historical analogue. I quite enjoyed Last Light of the Sun as well (pseudo vikings/saxons/celts). Both are a lot more grounded, imo. Reply reply Russmunki • • As others have mentioned, Tigana is not the best introduction to Kay’s work. Lions of Al-Rassan is a better choice. If I remember correctly, Tigana also had some of the characters from Fionavar Tapestry show up - I might be thinking of a different GGK book. It’s been a long time since I’ve read them. Reply reply :first-child]:mb-0 [&>:first-child]:rounded-[inherit] h-full w-full" > Maximus361 • • I’ve seen this book being gushed over for a couple years, tried it last month and DNF’d it. Reply reply Assiniboia • • It’s his best, I think, in terms of quality. Didn’t finish it. Too bored by 2/3rds and never picked it back up. A buddy of mine likes Kay quite a bit so I’m somewhat interested in trying some of the other books. But I find his prose blandly competent: he writes grammatically competent sentences but not fun to read. I also find his proclivities off-putting as they tend to be the same in each book. But then, he may yet surprise me. Reply reply Top 1% Rank by size More posts you may like r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online I spent the past year reading Guy Gavriel Kay's Bibliography - Here's my (non-spoiler) overview of his work upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Is the Pariah a good example of Anthony Ryan? comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Where to start with Guy Gavriel Kay's works? upvotes · comments r/audiobooks • r/audiobooks The audiobooks subreddit is a community of audiobibliophiles sharing and looking for their next great listen. Members Online Simon Vance + Guy Gavriel Kay's books = sublime upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online The fact that Guy Gavriel Kay published three of the best fantasy novels ever written back-to-back-to-back is crazy to me and should be talked about more upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online [No Spoilers] Just finished 'Tigana' by Guy Gavriel Kay, and I feel foolish for putting off reading this author for so long. upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Why the flip didn’t anyone tell me Guy Gavriel Kay is so damn good? upvotes · comments r/Stormlight_Archive • r/Stormlight_Archive A community for the Stormlight Archive series by Brandon Sanderson. Members Online SPOILER Would you say SLA/Roshar is the *main/central* story of the Cosmere? At least for now? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online SPOILER Anyone have spoiler free opinions on The Fionavar Tapestry series by Guy Gavriel Kay? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Guy Gavriel Kay - where to start? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online SPOILER Just finished Tigana; I'm disappointed upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Best of Guy Gavriel Kay upvotes · comments r/yakuzagames • r/yakuzagames The unofficial subreddit for Yakuza and other Ryu Ga Gotoku games! Members Online Do you have any further questions? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Does Guy Gavriel Kay's alt-Earth have a name? upvotes · comments r/NBA_Draft • r/NBA_Draft A hub for the hardcore NBA Draft enthusiast. The home of hype and hope. Where logical evaluation and substance generate discussion, rather than conventional stereotypes and uninspiring cliches. Analysis, articles, highlight videos, news & updates, information, rumors, interesting stats, podcasts, etc. Members Online Is Andre Iguodala a Good Comparison For Stephon Castle? comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online SPOILER Book Review: Tigana, by Guy Gavriel Kay (Minor Spoilers) upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Fantasy books with deep, profound messages and themes? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Books/series that are heavily character-driven with likeable protagonists? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Books with both excellent prose and great storytelling. upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Review: Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay upvotes · comments r/movies • r/movies The goal of /r/Movies is to provide an inclusive place for discussions and news about films with major releases. Submissions should be for the purpose of informing or initiating a discussion, not just to entertain readers. Read our extensive list of rules for more information on other types of posts like fan-art and self-promotion, or message the moderators if you have any questions. Members Online What's it called when characters explain the plot through unnatural dialog? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Urban fantasy but... without the tropes of urban fantasy? upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online SPOILER Tigana: a discussion (SPOILERS) upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Suggestions for the defining books in fantasy for a reading journey upvotes · comments r/Fantasy • r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online Tigana - Guy Gavriel Kay upvotes · comments Related discussion Tigana Book Discussion Top Posts Reddit reReddit: Top posts of March 14, 2024 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of March 2024 Reddit reReddit: Top posts of 2024 &nbsp; &nbsp; TOPICS Internet Culture (Viral) Amazing Animals & Pets Cringe & Facepalm Funny Interesting Memes Oddly Satisfying Reddit Meta Wholesome & Heartwarming Games Action Games Adventure Games Esports Gaming Consoles & Gear Gaming News & Discussion Mobile Games Other Games Role-Playing Games Simulation Games Sports & Racing Games Strategy Games Tabletop Games Q&As Q&As Stories & Confessions Technology 3D Printing Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning Computers & Hardware Consumer Electronics DIY Electronics Programming Software & Apps Streaming Services Tech News & Discussion Virtual & Augmented Reality Pop Culture Celebrities Creators & Influencers Generations & Nostalgia Podcasts Streamers Tarot & Astrology Movies & TV Action Movies & Series Animated Movies & Series Comedy Movies & Series Crime, Mystery, & Thriller Movies & Series Documentary Movies & Series Drama Movies & Series Fantasy Movies & Series Horror Movies & Series Movie News & Discussion Reality TV Romance Movies & Series Sci-Fi Movies & Series Superhero Movies & Series TV News & Discussion RESOURCES About Reddit Advertise Help Blog Careers Press Communities Best of Reddit Topics Content Policy Privacy Policy User Agreement Log In / Sign Up Advertise on Reddit Shop Collectible Avatars Reddit, Inc. © 2024. All rights reserved. 