 Reddit - Dive into anything Advertisement Open menu r/Fantasy Get app Log In Get the Reddit app Scan this QR code to download the app now Or check it out in the app stores Home Popular Topics Gaming Valheim Genshin Impact Minecraft Pokimane Halo Infinite Call of Duty: Warzone Path of Exile Hollow Knight: Silksong Escape from Tarkov Watch Dogs: Legion Sports NFL NBA Megan Anderson Atlanta Hawks Los Angeles Lakers Boston Celtics Arsenal F.C. Philadelphia 76ers Premier League UFC Business GameStop Moderna Pfizer Johnson & Johnson AstraZeneca Walgreens Best Buy Novavax SpaceX Tesla Crypto Cardano Dogecoin Algorand Bitcoin Litecoin Basic Attention Token Bitcoin Cash Television The Real Housewives of Atlanta The Bachelor Sister Wives 90 Day Fiance Wife Swap The Amazing Race Australia Married at First Sight The Real Housewives of Dallas My 600-lb Life Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Celebrity Kim Kardashian Doja Cat Iggy Azalea Anya Taylor-Joy Jamie Lee Curtis Natalie Portman Henry Cavill Millie Bobby Brown Tom Hiddleston Keanu Reeves Animals and Pets Anime Art Cars and Motor Vehicles Crafts and DIY Culture, Race, and Ethnicity Ethics and Philosophy Fashion Food and Drink History Hobbies Law Learning and Education Military Movies Music Place Podcasts and Streamers Politics Programming Reading, Writing, and Literature Religion and Spirituality Science Tabletop Games Technology Travel Resources About Reddit Advertise Help Communities Rereddit Topics Blog Careers Press Content Policy Privacy Policy User Agreement Reddit, Inc. © 2023. All rights reserved. Go to Fantasy r/Fantasy r/Fantasy r/Fantasy is the internet's largest discussion forum for the greater Speculative Fiction genre. Fans of fantasy, science fiction, horror, alt history, and more can all find a home with us. We welcome respectful dialogue related to speculative fiction in literature, games, film, and the wider world. We ask all users help us create a welcoming environment by reporting posts/comments that do not follow the subreddit rules. Members Online • by fincoherent Tigana by GGK - should I keep going? So I'm about 40% through Tigana by Guy Gavriel Kay. As other people have said, the prose is gorgeous and I like the characterisation and world. That said, I'm finding it pretty slow and not enjoying how overly emotional everything is. I keep rolling my eyes whenever someone starts going on about how AWFUL it is that Tigana lost its name and YOU cant even IMAGINE how terrible my soul is like a black PIT of DESPAIR that NOTHING will ever fix it til my LAND is mine again my HEART flies on the SOARING wings of doves whenever I HEAR its name Anyway, 2 questions: Is Tigana going to pick up? Are his other books similar? Brisker pace/bit less over the top emotion-wise? Read more Archived post. New comments cannot be posted and votes cannot be cast. More posts you may like 