 Review: All the Seas of the World by Guy Gavriel Kay – superstardrifter Skip to content Search Search for: superstardrifter if all the stars were books, the galaxy would still be smaller than my TBR list Bluesky Goodreads Menu Fantasy All Mythology Dark/Grimdark Epic/High Fantasy Steampunk LitRPG Urban Fantasy Other Fantasy Sci-Fi Romance LGBTQ+ Audiobook Self-Published & Indie SPFBOXI Open Search Review: All the Seas of the World by Guy Gavriel Kay Anyone who knows me knows that I can’t keep my grabby hands off of a GGK book, and this one was obviously no exception. So, when it popped up on NetGalley I immediately reached out my grabby hands at it. So thanks to the author, as well as Berkley for the review copy! On a dark night along a lonely stretch of coast a small ship sends two people ashore. Their purpose is assassination. They have been hired by two of the most dangerous men alive to alter the balance of power in the world. If they succeed, the consequences will affect the destinies of empires, and lives both great and small. One of those arriving at that beach is a woman abducted by corsairs as a child and sold into years of servitude. Having escaped, she is trying to chart her own course — and is bent upon revenge. Another is a seafaring merchant who still remembers being exiled as a child with his family from their home, for their faith, a moment that never leaves him. In what follows, through a story both intimate and epic, unforgettable characters are immersed in the fierce and deadly struggles that define their time. All the Seas of the World is the story that takes place in the same world as Children of Earth and Sky and A Brightness Long Ago. Okay, well… I’m pretty sure that most of his books take place in the same world but these ones take place at a vaguely similar time in this same world. This one especially had characters that were still fresh in my mind. You don’t need to have read the other two to understand what’s happening here, but if you have, you will see familiar names and places. As I said about A Brightness Long Ago, it can basically go without saying at this point that because this is a GGK book, it is beautifully written. That’s just a given to me at this point. Dat. Prose. Tho. This one took me on a lovely ride through alternate-universe Europe just a few years past the alternate-universe Fall of Constantinople to the alternate-universe Ottoman Empire… so… about 1460, give or take? So, we have a recognizable-but-different setting in which GGK places these characters that I could not help but obsess about a little bit. This volume mostly follows Lenia Serrano, a former slave and her merchant partner through everything from an assassination to a reunion. There are other characters who take the stage of course, many of them familiar if you’ve read GGK’s previous two books, but Lenia totally stole the show for me. She lives in a world which is very harsh to women, and slaves, and female former slaves… and yet she doesn’t take crap from anyone along her way… and ‘anyone along her way’ includes everyone from Dukes to Kings to the actual Pope. So, I was a fan of Lenia’s attitude and how it made her more friends than enemies, even in a world not particularly friendly to women. So, all told I loved All the Seas of the World and I would 100% recommend it to anyone who likes a really well put together alternate history novel, or loves GGK’s work, or loves beautiful prose that takes you away to another world. As I said, you don’t need to read Children of Earth and Sky or A Brightness Long Ago in order to find enjoyment in this novel, but I think that my experience of it was a little better for having read them. Take that as you will. ^_^ 5/5 stars! ~ Goodreads Amazon Audible Share this: Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr Like Loading... Related Published by superstardrifter canadian expat - insatiable reader and book-talk-a-lotter - enthusiastic and vocal gamer - booper of all the snoots View all posts by superstardrifter May 9, 2022 Epic/High Fantasy , Fantasy Post navigation Review: Nettle & Bone by T. Kingfisher Review: Master of Sorrows by Justin Call One thought on “ Review: All the Seas of the World by Guy Gavriel Kay ” Add yours Pingback: Friday Five: Can See Less Clear Now The Rain Is Gone – Peat Long's Blog Leave a comment Cancel reply Δ This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. Search Search for: Subscribe to Blog via Email Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. Email Address: Subscribe Join 295 other subscribers Goodreads – Currently Reading Follow superstardrifter on WordPress.com NetGalley Create a website or blog at WordPress.com Up ↑ Comment Reblog Subscribe Subscribed superstardrifter Join 295 other subscribers Sign me up Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. superstardrifter Subscribe Subscribed Sign up Log in Copy shortlink Report this content View post in Reader Manage subscriptions Collapse this bar %d 