              WRITING ADVENTURES       By Chris Perkins & Greg Bilsland

A D&D® adventure can be location-based, event-based, or both.
  A location-based adventure, in its simplest form, is a room-by-room description of a dungeon, which in D&D
terms can be any self-contained adventure location. Most dungeons are subterranean, but we also use the term
“dungeon” when referring to surface locations such as castles and ruins. The location in large part defines what’s
memorable and exciting about the adventure, and some of the most memorable D&D adventures ever written
featured distinctive, memorable dungeons.
  The simplest event-based adventure presents a sequence of events that are programmed to occur one after
another. More sophisticated event-based scenarios have “branches” built into them so that players can make
choices that affect the outcome, creating a less linear experience. That’s not to say that event-based scenarios
don’t have locations to explore—quite the contrary! However, the locations generally take a back seat to the
unfolding narrative.
  In truth, many adventures that are location-based have programmed events built into them, and many event-
based adventures include room-by-room descriptions of important locations.

General Principles
Regardless of an adventure’s type, level, length, or setting, keep these principles in mind.

1. A D&D adventure follows the rules of good storytelling (which I won’t belabor here). One important thing to
remember: The player characters (PCs) are the heroes, not mere spectators, and they’re looking for quests that
matter. Gathering animal pelts for a lazy merchant might be a tolerable MMO quest, but it makes for an
underwhelming D&D experience.

2. An adventure needs a credible threat — one worthy of the heroes’ attention. The threat might be a singular
villain or monster, a villain with lackeys, an assortment of monsters, or an evil organization. The antagonists,
whoever they are, should have logical goals that the heroes can uncover and thwart in the course of the
adventure.

3. An adventure should blend familiar D&D tropes with clever twists. It might seem stereotypical to build an
adventure around dragons, orcs, and insane wizards in towers, but these are staples of the D&D experience. It
might also seem trite to begin an adventure in a tavern, but again, it’s an idea that’s very true to D&D. Clichés are
okay, as long as the adventure can still surprise and delight players. Avail yourself of everything the game has to
offer, but try to put your own clever “spin” on it. For example, the mysterious figure who presents adventurers
with a quest on behalf of the king might, in fact, be the king in disguise. The crazy wizard in the tower might be a
projected illusion created by a band of greedy gnome thieves to guard their loot.

4. An adventure is about the here and now. A little bit of history might be needed to set things up, but the less of
it, the better. Instead of dealing with what happened in the past, an adventure should focus on describing the
present situation, what the bad guys are up to, and how the player characters get involved in the story.

5. An adventure must allow the players’ actions and decisions to matter, not control the outcome of encounters
to the extent that players’ actions and decisions become meaningless. The adventure isn’t a novel or a novella; it
needs to allow for more than one preset outcome. Otherwise, players will feel “railroaded” by the plot. For
example, if the major villain shows up before the end of the adventure, the text needs to account for the
possibility that the heroes might slay or capture the villain. In a D&D game, weirder things can happen!

6. An adventure needs to present information in a logical order, so that a DM reading it for the first time isn’t
confused. For example, make sure that an NPC is properly introduced before casually mentioning the NPC by
name in running text. Also, the adventure shouldn’t conceal or bury important information that the DM needs to
understand what’s really going on. The goal isn’t to keep the DM in suspense, but rather to organize all the
information the DM needs in the most logical and intuitive way.

7. An adventure should strive to present information as concisely as possible, to ease the burden on the DM.
However, there are certain elements of an adventure that deserve special attention, namely NPCs, dungeon
dressings, and treasure hoards. You can add character to any NPC by describing his or her distinctive physical
features, mannerisms, and quirks (which the DM can then use to roleplay the NPC effectively). A striking
dungeon feature (such as a mural or carving) or interesting bit of treasure (such as an art object or piece of
jewelry) can also benefit from a splash of descriptive text.

8. An adventure needs to appeal to a variety of player and character types. Some players prefer combat and
exploration, while others relish intrigue and roleplaying. Some characters have selfish motives, while others are
more altruistic. An adventure needs to cast a wide net and draw as many PCs into the story as possible. When
plotting out an adventure, it’s always good to ask questions such as, “Does this adventure work if the party
includes a barbarian?” or “Is there anything here for the player who enjoys roleplaying?”

9. An adventure needs to rise above the humdrum. Any DM can throw a bunch of monsters in a room for the
heroes to fight. A good adventure strives to make the DM sit up and say, “Wow, that’s a really clever idea!” or
“Wow, I can’t wait to run this encounter!” or “Wow, I wish I’d thought of that!” Elevating an encounter beyond
the norm can be accomplished with odd monster pairings, unusual terrain, environmental hazards, traps,
unexpected reinforcements, red herrings, atypical monster tactics, ruses and other deceptions, NPCs with
complex motives, and the occasional plot twist.

10. An adventure needs thoughtfully constructed, neatly labeled maps. Most DMs are visual people, and a good
map not only invites them to run the adventure but also gives them an idea of what the adventure is about. A
dull, uninspired map has the opposite effect. Nonsymmetrical, nonlinear dungeon layouts are better than
symmetrical or linear ones, since they allow players to make choices while keeping the dungeon unpredictable.
Spend as much time on your maps as you spend on your text, and Dungeon Masters will love you for it. For the
writer who can’t draw or doesn’t like drawing, there are lots of mapmaking software options to choose from.

To write good novels, you need to read good novels, not only to see what other people have done but also to
learn the tricks of the trade. The same is true for adventures. The more good D&D adventures you read, the
easier it will be to write good D&D adventures of your own.

Additional Principles for Organized Play
When writing adventures for the D&D Adventurers League, keep the following in mind:

    1.   Utilize previously published monsters and magic items unless an administrator gives you approval.
         The Monster Manual and Dungeon Master’s Guide contain hundreds of magic items and monsters, and
         while these resources lack some monsters and items, it should be possible to work around the
         absences. NPCs are an exception. If possible, use a humanoid template for the MM, but if not, it’s okay
         to create a unique NPC.
    2.   Use the Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, and Dungeon Master’s Guide as an authoritative source on
         matters of lore. Don’t assume you know the story of a monster or item—even a common one!
    3.   Do not assume that players built characters using any resources other than the Player’s Handbook.
         Don’t build adventures for “optimized characters” or adventures that assume a “balanced party.”
         Player skill level, character power level, and party builds will vary.
    4.   Even in a shorter organized play experience, principle #5 (see guidelines above) holds true. Just
         because an adventure is only 2 hours or 4 hours doesn’t mean it should be linear or have a pre-
         established outcome. Don’t decide in advance how the adventure should end.
    5.   Characters should be able to make significant choices, even in the context of an organized play
         adventure or a short play experience. How do the characters approach the bad guys’ base? Do the
         characters barter with the orc tribe or wipe them out? What does the party do with the valuable cursed
         object it recovered—sell it or destroy it?
    6.   Adventurers League content can use factions (but it doesn't have to!). Here are some guidelines for
         using factions:
              a. Don’t put factions in direct opposition. They should always have a reason to work together or
                    tolerate one another.
              b. A character’s faction can inform the character’s motivations for a quest or his or her
                    interaction with an NPC, but it should always be an additional narrative layer beyond the
                    primary adventure motivation.
              c. Adventures should not presume a group includes a member of a particular faction.
              d. Commonly appear as just NPCs.

For rules on grammar and punctuation, please see The Chicago Manual of Style (16th edition) and the
D&D House Style Guide. For adventure format, refer to the Adventure Format Template.
