
===== PAGE 1 =====
W A
RITING D
By Chris Perkins
A D&D® adventure can be location-based, event-based, o
A location-based adventure, in its simplest form, is a ro
terms can be any self-contained adventure location. Most
“dungeon” when referring to surface locations such as ca
memorable and exciting about the adventure, and some o
featured distinctive, memorable dungeons.
The simplest event-based adventure presents a sequen
another. More sophisticated event-based scenarios have
choices that affect the outcome, creating a less linear exp
don’t have locations to explore—quite the contrary! How
unfolding narrative.
In truth, many adventures that are location-based have
based adventures include room-by-room descriptions of
General Principles
Regardless of an adventure’s type, level, length, or setting
1. A D&D adventure follows the rules of good storytelling
remember: The player characters (PCs) are the heroes, n
matter. Gathering animal pelts for a lazy merchant might
underwhelming D&D experience.
2. An adventure needs a credible threat — one worthy of
villain or monster, a villain with lackeys, an assortment o
whoever they are, should have logical goals that the hero
adventure.
3. An adventure should blend familiar D&D tropes with c
adventure around dragons, orcs, and insane wizards in to
might also seem trite to begin an adventure in a tavern, b
okay, as long as the adventure can still surprise and delig
offer, but try to put your own clever “spin” on it. For exam
with a quest on behalf of the king might, in fact, be the kin
projected illusion created by a band of greedy gnome thie
4. An adventure is about the here and now. A little bit of h
it, the better. Instead of dealing with what happened in th
present situation, what the bad guys are up to, and how t
5. An adventure must allow the players’ actions and decis
to the extent that players’ actions and decisions become m
needs to allow for more than one preset outcome. Otherw
example, if the major villain shows up before the end of t
possibility that the heroes might slay or capture the villa
6. An adventure needs to present information in a logical
confused. For example, make sure that an NPC is properl
name in running text. Also, the adventure shouldn’t conc
understand what’s really going on. The goal isn’t to keep
information the DM needs in the most logical and intuitiv
7. An adventure should strive to present information as c
However, there are certain elements of an adventure tha
dressings, and treasure hoards. You can add character to
--- col ---
DVENTURES
s & Greg Bilsland
or both.
oom-by-room description of a dungeon, which in D&D
t dungeons are subterranean, but we also use the term
astles and ruins. The location in large part defines what’s
of the most memorable D&D adventures ever written
nce of events that are programmed to occur one after
“branches” built into them so that players can make
perience. That’s not to say that event-based scenarios
wever, the locations generally take a back seat to the
e programmed events built into them, and many event-
f important locations.
g, keep these principles in mind.
g (which I won’t belabor here). One important thing to
not mere spectators, and they’re looking for quests that
t be a tolerable MMO quest, but it makes for an
f the heroes’ attention. The threat might be a singular
of monsters, or an evil organization. The antagonists,
oes can uncover and thwart in the course of the
clever twists. It might seem stereotypical to build an
owers, but these are staples of the D&D experience. It
but again, it’s an idea that’s very true to D&D. Clichés are
ght players. Avail yourself of everything the game has to
mple, the mysterious figure who presents adventurers
ng in disguise. The crazy wizard in the tower might be a
eves to guard their loot.
history might be needed to set things up, but the less of
he past, an adventure should focus on describing the
the player characters get involved in the story.
sions to matter, not control the outcome of encounters
meaningless. The adventure isn’t a novel or a novella; it
wise, players will feel “railroaded” by the plot. For
the adventure, the text needs to account for the
ain. In a D&D game, weirder things can happen!
l order, so that a DM reading it for the first time isn’t
ly introduced before casually mentioning the NPC by
ceal or bury important information that the DM needs to
the DM in suspense, but rather to organize all the
ve way.
concisely as possible, to ease the burden on the DM.
at deserve special attention, namely NPCs, dungeon
o any NPC by describing his or her distinctive physical
===== PAGE 2 =====
features, mannerisms, and quirks (which the DM can then
dungeon feature (such as a mural or carving) or interesti
jewelry) can also benefit from a splash of descriptive text
8. An adventure needs to appeal to a variety of player and
exploration, while others relish intrigue and roleplaying.
more altruistic. An adventure needs to cast a wide net an
plotting out an adventure, it’s always good to ask questio
includes a barbarian?” or “Is there anything here for the p
9. An adventure needs to rise above the humdrum. Any D
heroes to fight. A good adventure strives to make the DM
“Wow, I can’t wait to run this encounter!” or “Wow, I wis
the norm can be accomplished with odd monster pairing
unexpected reinforcements, red herrings, atypical monst
complex motives, and the occasional plot twist.
10. An adventure needs thoughtfully constructed, neatly
map not only invites them to run the adventure but also g
dull, uninspired map has the opposite effect. Nonsymmet
symmetrical or linear ones, since they allow players to m
Spend as much time on your maps as you spend on your
writer who can’t draw or doesn’t like drawing, there are
To write good novels, you need to read good novels, not o
learn the tricks of the trade. The same is true for adventu
easier it will be to write good D&D adventures of your ow
Additional Principles for Organized Pla
When writing adventures for the D&D Adventurers Leag
1. Utilize previously published monsters and mag
The Monster Manual and Dungeon Master’s Guid
while these resources lack some monsters and i
absences. NPCs are an exception. If possible, use
to create a unique NPC.
2. Use the Player’s Handbook, Monster Manual, and
matters of lore. Don’t assume you know the stor
3. Do not assume that players built characters usin
Don’t build adventures for “optimized character
Player skill level, character power level, and par
4. Even in a shorter organized play experience, pr
because an adventure is only 2 hours or 4 hours
established outcome. Don’t decide in advance h
5. Characters should be able to make significant ch
adventure or a short play experience. How do th
characters barter with the orc tribe or wipe the
object it recovered—sell it or destroy it?
6. Adventurers League content can use factions (b
using factions:
a. Don’t put factions in direct opposition
tolerate one another.
b. A character’s faction can inform the ch
interaction with an NPC, but it should
primary adventure motivation.
c. Adventures should not presume a gro
d. Commonly appear as just NPCs.
For rules on grammar and punctuation, please see Th
D&D House Style Guide. For adventure format, refer t
--- col ---
n use to roleplay the NPC effectively). A striking
ing bit of treasure (such as an art object or piece of
t.
d character types. Some players prefer combat and
. Some characters have selfish motives, while others are
nd draw as many PCs into the story as possible. When
ons such as, “Does this adventure work if the party
player who enjoys roleplaying?”
DM can throw a bunch of monsters in a room for the
M sit up and say, “Wow, that’s a really clever idea!” or
sh I’d thought of that!” Elevating an encounter beyond
gs, unusual terrain, environmental hazards, traps,
ter tactics, ruses and other deceptions, NPCs with
labeled maps. Most DMs are visual people, and a good
gives them an idea of what the adventure is about. A
trical, nonlinear dungeon layouts are better than
make choices while keeping the dungeon unpredictable.
text, and Dungeon Masters will love you for it. For the
lots of mapmaking software options to choose from.
only to see what other people have done but also to
ures. The more good D&D adventures you read, the
wn.
ay
gue, keep the following in mind:
gic items unless an administrator gives you approval.
de contain hundreds of magic items and monsters, and
items, it should be possible to work around the
e a humanoid template for the MM, but if not, it’s okay
d Dungeon Master’s Guide as an authoritative source on
ry of a monster or item—even a common one!
ng any resources other than the Player’s Handbook.
rs” or adventures that assume a “balanced party.”
rty builds will vary.
rinciple #5 (see guidelines above) holds true. Just
s doesn’t mean it should be linear or have a pre-
how the adventure should end.
hoices, even in the context of an organized play
he characters approach the bad guys’ base? Do the
em out? What does the party do with the valuable cursed
but it doesn't have to!). Here are some guidelines for
n. They should always have a reason to work together or
haracter’s motivations for a quest or his or her
always be an additional narrative layer beyond the
oup includes a member of a particular faction.
he Chicago Manual of Style (16th edition) and the
to the Adventure Format Template.