
===== PAGE 1 =====
®
D&D ADVENTU
THE WILD BEYO
DUNGEONCRAF
Effective Date: Octobe
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
The Wild Beyond the Witchlight Domains of
You can create your own adventures foDr
using and Delight or s
This document provides design guidance for these adventures.
create your own adventures, you’ll also want the adventure temp
can be found on the DMsGuild here.
PTION REATE OMAIN OF
O 1. C A D D
The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
ENERAL UIDELINES
G G
deviates slightly from the use
of the traditional pillars of D&D, typically through a greater
degree of non-combat approaches to solving challenges.
Consider taking inspiration from this approach when you
Domains of Delight
design your own Feywild adventures. There is a section in the
supplement that suggests various fairytale
and folklore books which might be helpful as inspiration.
ECHNICAL NFORMATION
T I
A template is provided for use, including the Community
Created D&D Adventurers League logo. You must use this
template, and follow the formatting standards as presented
in the template. This logo must appear on your adventure
(see “Additional Guidelines” below). You should be familiar
with the D&D Style Guide (also provided) as well. Please
review the Wizards and the DMsGuild Content Guidelines.
OnPlyu ybolius h(ionrg a. co-designer) can Dungeon Master your
adventure until it is published in the Dungeon MTahsete Wrsi lGdu ild.
Beyond the WitIcfh ylioguh tin tend to publish your adventure on the
Dungeon Masters Guild, adventures supporting
season must appear for sale by August
31, 2022. There are no exceptions to this rule. If you do not
publish your adventure you can continue to Dungeon Master
it through December 31, 2022. After that time, unpublished
adAvecncetusrseibs ialirtey .n o longer available in the D&D Adventurers
League.
There is also the option for producing a more
accessibility-friendly version of your adventure. The template
for that will be available soon and inserted into the pack.
RT AND RAPHIC ESIGN
A G D
Your adventure must follow the template provided for layout,
but may include art and other graphic design elements
subject to the terms and conditions of the DMsGuild support
site, which has information on content, format, art, and
various other common creator questions.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
URERSLEAGUE
OND THE WITCHLIGHT
FT DESIGNGUIDE:
er 1, 2021. Version 1.2.
Domains of Delight.
DoDm&aDin Asd ovfe Dnetluigrehrts League set in a fey domain of your own design
set it in the domain of Fablerise as presented in
can be found for sale in the DMsGuild. In order to
plates and style guides used for the Dungeoncraft program. They
ELIGHT
D
Adventure Duration.
RAFTING OUR DVENTURE
C Y A
Your adventure should ideally be
written for a two-hour or four-hour play time. Adventures
with shorter playtimes are not allowed, and while longer
adventures are allowed, they are treated as four hour
Usaindgv eCnrteuarteusr feosr. purposes of rewards. You must note your
adventure play time in the description of thMe oandsvteenrt Muraen. u al
The Wild B eYyooun dc atnh eu Wsei tccrhelaigtuhrtes suggested in the
DMoomrdaeinnk Daeinneinze’sn Tso tmabel eo fw Fhoiecsh, ar eV ofrloom’s Gthueid e to Monsters
and . Other monsters from
or
can be included, but should be used sparingly. Stat blocks
must appear as printed. Note that if you are using an NPC
stat block such as the cult fanatic and need to add racial
abilities for a gnome you can annotated it after the stat
block with "Harry is a gnome cult fanatic with the
following characteristics: Size small, Speed 25 feet,
darkvision 60 feet, Languages Gnomish and Common." This
information could alDsoo mbea pinrse osef nDteeldig whtithin the encounter
text.
If an instruction in the document includes
a change to a stat block, mark that change with anD aosmteariisnks
“o*f” D aenlidg hintclude a note after the stat block explaining the
Adavsetnetruisrke. YSeotut icnagn.not use the archfey presented in
.
Most of the adventure must take place in
the domain you create. If, for story purposes, they need to
start not in your domain, then you should choose a location
Cainno tnhiec aFlo Ergleomtteenn tRse.alms. Only you or a co-designer can
create adventures in your domain.
The Wild Beyond th eIt W isi timchpliogrhttant to note that your
adventure cannot feature the Prismeer domain featured in
.
EWARDS
R
At the end of this document, yoDuu nwgiello fnin Md atshtreere’s t Gaubildese of
magic items. Consumables can be from any DDAL allowed
source (most will be from the ).
Choose the magic item rewards for your adventure from
t•h ese tables using the following:
2-hour tier 1 (levels 1-4): choose 1 item from table A and
up to 3 common or 1 uncommon consumables.
ersonal use only.
1
===== PAGE 2 =====
•
4-hour tier 1 (levels 1-4): choose 1 item from table A, 1
• from table B and up to 3 common or uncommon
consumables.
• 2-hour tier 2 (levels 5-10) choose 1 item from table C and
up to 3 common or uncommon consumables.
4-hour tier 2 (levels 5-10) choose 1 item from table C, 1
from table B and up to 3 common or uncommon
consumables.
Dungeon Master’s Guide,
You may add 1 minor property or quirk to each non-
Dcounnsguemona bMlea smtearg’sic G iuteidme. (see the
page 143). Properties must come from the table in the
You can take inspiration from your
adventure setting’s theme or Feywild themes in general when
choosing these. You may use the table for quirks or add a
FGeoyldw Rildew inasrpdirse.d non-mechanical (game mechanics) quirk.
These are based on tier. This is total gold for
the group, not individual. Treasure such as gems, coins, art
objects, and anything else portable that isn’t adventuring
gear counts towards the gold rewards listed.
GOLD REWARDS BY ADVENTURE TIER
Tier Min. Max.
1 100 gp 500 gp
2 1000 gp 5000 gp
DOMAINS OF DELIGHT
Domains of Delight
SING
U
Follow the method outlined in the for
creating your domain for use in your adventu re. In places
where the document implies you can decide on the fly what
triggers something (such as in “Weird Magic”section) you
need to define what occurs or give the DM a short list of
options appropriate for your domain. If it is something
presFeenywteidld t oG uoindleys be used if you need to create something on
the fly, then the use of the tables is optional, such is the case
for . You can use the tables in that section as
inspiration or for creating NPCs. A few sections need
additional guidance for use in D&D Adventurers League and
are presented below.
EY UTLOOK
F O
The information that is presented here should be reflected in
your NPCs, but also should be something a helpful fey guide
might present in a tier 1 (levels 1-4) adventure.
EY ACTS
F P
Fey Pacts can be used but should be limited to a specific
task/need of either the fey or the adventurers rather than a
Lraenssdeorm P oaccctu Grirfetsn.ce.
These can be used in tier 1 (levels 1-4) or
tier 2 (levels 5-10) adventures. The following restrictions
a• pCplhya (rrmewards requiring no adjustments areC nhoatr lmis toefd ):
Restoration Charm of the Slayer.
• Fey Kin. sThhiips .g ift cannot include either the
or the
• Guide. This does not persist past the end of the
adventure.
The Guide can be a reoccurring NPC if you write
more than one adventure, otherwise this benefit does not
persist outside of the adventure.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
• Invitation.
• Minor Magic Item.
This should occur within the adventure.
This can be a Common or Uncommon
item, however if it is an Uncommon item its use is limited
to the adventure. It does not count toward the characters
• mPraoxf imciaegnicc yit.em limit for that time, however if it requires
attunement normal attunement rules apply.
• Spellcasting .This does not persist past the end of the
adventure.
This does not persist past the end of the
Graedavteern tPuarcet. Gifts.
These can only be used in tier 2 (levels 5-
10) and the following rules apply (rewards requiring no
•a dAjuusdtmieennctes .are not listed):
• Major Magic Item
This should occur within the adventure.
• Time Displacemen. Ltegendary items are limited to use
within the adventure and are not available as rewards.
• isT uisteleful only if the player intends to
retire their character.
The fey cannot grant a for locations within the
Forgotten Realms (such as “Duke of Daggerford”) but can
• grant a title in your crWeaetaeldt hdomain (such a “Baron
Snowfen of Skylar”).
• TSahfee atymount listed in is changed to the following:
10,000 gp.
. This can be used within the framework of the
• advewnitsuhre but generally is not impactful in D&D
Adventurers League.
The spell is still subject to D&D Adventurers League
rules regarding scope of what can be gained and the
permanency (or lack thereof) of anything granted through
the spell.
OST OF A EY ACT
C F P
While the “your firstborn” is a traditional cost (Greater Pact),
do not use this cost. Many of the costs listed for Greater Pacts
are only appropriate if it is the focus of the adventure
(perform 3 quests, return stolen legendary item, etc.).
REAKING A ACT
B P
When making a pact is part of the adventure, then one of
these consequences should be included. Make sure you
include the information regarding how this can be reversed
in your adventure.
EY URSES
F C
You can choose the effect instead of rolling if using this in
your adventure or give the DM a list of three possibilities to
choose from. If removal is not completed by the conclusion of
the adventure, then it persists for one more adventure or
session afterwards. At the end of the next adventure or
session, it disappears.
ersonal use only.
2
===== PAGE 3 =====
REATING YOUR RCHFEY
C A
You can use the tables randomly, choose from the features
listed or consider them more of a guide to what is max
feasible/allowed. If you intend mfoar xthe characters to fight the
archfey, then for tier 1 (levels 1-4) you are limited to a
CR 10 creature and for tier 2 a CR 15 creature.
AGICAL IFTS
M G
Anytime an entry says “it will vanish after a specified amount
of time” that time is the adventure. A few gifts have additional
modifiers. Only one magical gift may be given as a reward per
a• dCvehnatrumre.. Charm of
Restoration Charm of the Slayer.
• Refuge This gift cannot include either the
or the
. While this gift does vanish after the adventure it
first appears in, if you write another adventure in your
• dTormaianiinn ygou can indicate that the refuge reappears for the
duration of that adventure.
. This normally costs 250 downtime days and
1gp/day (PH 187) and is also limited to languages or tool
proficiencies. The archfey instead grants a specific training
or daily inspiration. The adventure must specify which
language, tool proficiency, skill proficiency, or feat the
archfey g ranOtns eth srpoeucgihfi tcr laainnignuga. gOen loyr o tnoeo lo pptrioofnic mieanyc bye.
o
selected from the list below.
Daily inspiration. 50
o
dOonwe nstpimecei fdica yssk, i0ll gppr. oficiency
o
20 downtime days, 0 gp.
One specific feat . 100 downtime
o
days plus 100 gp.
. Must be from a player
allowed resource. 200 downtime plus 250 gp.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
DDITIONAL UIDELINES
A G :
•
HE INE RINT
T F P
At your option, you can publish your adventure on the
• Dungeon Masters Guild. Until published, only the designers
(maximum two individuals) can run the adventure.
You and up to one co-designer can create a domain for use
for your adventures. No one else, including other co-
• designers, may use the setting of that domain for future
Dungeoncraft adventures.
• The D&D Adventurers League Content Managers do not
need to review your adventure for youM too nrsutne ro Mr paunbualilsh it.
• Please include stat blocks for any creature you use in your
• adventure that does not appear in the .
Adventures must use the template provided. WBW-DC
When published on the Dungeon Masters Guild (or listed in
an event program), your adventure must use the
code to identify it as a Dungeoncraft Adventure intended
for use during this Seasonal Campaign. This code should
appear in the upper left corner of your cover. (If you intend
to write multiple adventures, then we suggest that you
consider using a three-letter identifier in you code such as
the domain name so people can quickly find them. For
• example: WBW-DC-SKY-01 for the first adventure in series
set in a created domain called Skylar.)
The DDAL Community Created logo and the DMsGuild logo
• must appear on the cover. No other logos should appear on
the cover.
All Dungeoncraft Adventures published on the DM’s Guild
• must abide by the rules provided by the DM’s Guild in
terms of content that can be published in that marketplace.
Adventures must be written for a single table of players.
IMTPhOeRseT AcaNnTn:o t be epics/multi-table events.
Dungeoncraft Adventures can be removed
from the DMsGuild at any time for failing to meet these
standards, those prescribed by the DMsGuild, or for any other
reason deemed necessary by Wizards of the Coast.
Additionally, any designer(s) publishing a Dungeoncraft
Adventure on the Dungeon Masters Guild or running one that
does not follow these r ules can have their ability to continue
to create and publish sanctioned content under these rules
suspended or revoked.
ersonal use only.
3
===== PAGE 4 =====
TABLE A: UNCOMMON ITEMS TABLE B: COMMO
D12 A G IItCem TEM EWARDS D12 Item
M I R
Eyes of minute seeing Veteran’s c
Bag of holding Wand of py
1 1
Slippers of spider climbing Cloak of bil
2 2
Bracers of archery Pipe of smok
3 3
Boots of striding and Illuminator
4 4
springing
Masquerade
5
5 Figurine of wonderous
power (silver raven) Cloak of ma
6
6 Gem of brightness Hat of verm
7
7 Instrument of the bards 8 Staff of bird
(doss lute)
Pole of colla
9
8 Pearl of power
Talking doll
10
Cloak of protection
9
11 Wand of sm
Feywild shard (TCE)
10
12
Nature’s mantle (TCE)
11
12
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
ON ITEMS TABLE C: RARE ITEMS
D12 Item
cane (XGE) Staff of swarming insects
yrotechnics (XGE) Staff of the woodlands
1
llowing (XGE) Mantel of spell resistance
2
ke monsters (XGE) Horn of Valhalla (silver)
3
r’s tattoo (TCE) Figurine of wonderous power
4
(ivory goat)
e tattoo (TCE)
5 Elven chain
any fashions (XGE)
Bell branch (TCE)
6
min (XGE)
Boots of speed
7
d calls (XGE)
Bracers of defense
8
apsing (XGE)
Ioun stone (protection)
9
l (XGE)
Quall’s feather token (tree)
10
miles (XGE)
Ring of free action
11
12
ersonal use only.
4
===== PAGE 5 =====
PTION SING DVENTURE EE
OIf you are not int2ere.stUed in creatinAg your own domain, do nSot des
adventures by using the following adventure seeds and the Archf
are set in Fablerise, a small domain that has only recently appear
information about Prismeer, its archfey ruler, and Thither.
The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
ENERAL UIDELINES
G G
deviates slightly from the
use of the traditional pillars of D&D, typically through a
greater degree of non-combat approaches to solving
challenges. Consider taking inspiration from this approach
Domains of Delight
when you design your own Feywild adventures. There is a
section in the supplement that suggests
various fairytale and folklore books which might be
helpful as inspiration.
ECHNICAL NFORMATION
T I
A template is provided for use, including the Community
Created D&D Adventurers League logo. You must use this
template, and follow the formatting standards as
presented in the template. This logo must appear on your
adventure (see “Additional Guidelines” below). You should
be familiar with the D&D Style Guide (also provided) as
well. Please review the Wizards and the DMsGuild Content
Guidelines. Only you (or a co-designer) can Dungeon
MaPsutebrl iysohuinr ga.d venture until it is published in the Dungeon
Masters Guild. The
Wild Beyond thIef Wyoiutc ihnlitgehntd to publish your adventure on
the Dungeon Masters Guild, adventures supporting
season must appear for sale by
August 31, 2022. There are no exceptions to this rule. If
you do not publish your adventure you can continue to
Dungeon Master it through December 31, 2022. After that
timAec,c uenspsiubbilliistyh.e d adventures are no longer available in
the D&D Adventurers League.
There is also the option for producing a
more accessibility-friendly version of your adventure. The
template for that will be available shortly and inserted
into the pack.
RT AND RAPHIC ESIGN
A G D
Your adventure must follow the template provided for
layout, but may include art and other graphic design
elements subject to the terms and conditions of the
DMsGuild support site, which has information on content,
format, art, and various other common creator questions.
Adventure Duration.
RAFTING OUR DVENTURE
C Y A
Your adventure should ideally be
written for a two-hour or four-hour play time.
Adventures with shorter playtimes are not allowed, and
while longer adventures are allowed, they are treated as
four-hour adventures for purposes of rewards. You
must note your adventure play time in the description
of the adventure.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
EDS Domains of Delight
spair! W e have an aTltheer nWaitlidve B meyeothnodd t hfoer W crietcahtilniggh Dt ungeoncraft
fey described in the . These adventure seeds
red in Thither. See for more
Using Creatures.
Monster
Manual The Y Wouil dca Bne uyosen dc rtehaet Wurietsc hsluigghgtested in the
Domain DenizenMso tradbelnek waihniecnh’ sa rTeo mfroe mof tFhoee s, Volo’s
Guide to a Mndon sters . Other
monsters from or
can be included, but should be used
sparingly. Stat blocks must appear as printed. Note that
if you are using an NPC stat block such as the cult
fanatic and need to add racial abilities for a gnome you
can annotated it after the stat block with "Harry is a
gnome cult fanatic with the following characteristics:
Size small, Speed 25 feet, darkvision 60 feet, Languages
AdGvnenomtuirseh Saentdti Cnogm. mon." This information could also be
presented within the encounter text.
The adventure can start in the
Forgotten Realms, in Thither, or Fablerise. Other
settings, are not allowed, even briefly T. Fhaeb Wleirlids eB aenyodn itds
tahrceh Wfeiyt cthhlei gYhatr.n spinner are detailed in the Domains of
CaDnoelnigichatl iEnlfeomrmenattiso.n on Thither is in
It’s important to Tnhoete W thiladt Byoeyuor nd
athdev eWnittucrhel icgahnt’.t feature the death of NPCs or the
destruction of locations featured in
Domains of Delight
You can use the information about the fey provided in the
(including the restrictions listed in
the previous section) within the context of the
Adventure Seed used.
SING THE DVENTURE EEDS
U A S
Each adventure seed has a set level restriction, as well as
assigned character rewards that your adventure can use.
Your adventure can’t provide character rewards above
and beyond what’s listed, including story awards or
dAodwvenntitmuree a Scetievdit Tieist.l e.
These are placeholder titles. Please
create a unique title for your adventure when it’s
Adcvoemntpulertee Sde aendd L reevaedl yR taon rguen.. You are to add the name of
the seed in the credit section.
Adventure Seed Hook. This is the range of levels
that your adventure can accommodate.
Adventure Seed Rewar Tdhse. content of your adventure
should be based off this single evocative sentence.
Your adventure can provide
the items listed as rewards.
If it’s a two-hour adventure, you can include only those
two items.
If it’s a four-hour adventure, you can include the magic
item listed, in addition to those items listed for two-
Gohldo uRre awdavrednst.ures.
These are based on tier. This is total gold
for the group, not individual. Treasure such as gems, coins,
art objects, and anything else portable that isn’t
adventuring gear counts towards the gold rewards listed.
ersonal use only.
5
===== PAGE 6 =====
GOLD REWARDS BY ADVENTURE TIER
Tier Min. Max.
1 100 gp 500 gp
2 1000 gp 5000 gp
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
ersonal use only.
6
===== PAGE 7 =====
DDITIONAL UIDELINES HE INE
A G :T F
•
RINT
P
At your option, you can publish your adventure on the
Dungeon Masters Guild. Until published, only the
• designers (maximum two individuals) can run the
adventure.
The D&D Adventurers League Content Managers do not
• need to review your adventure for you to run or publish
it. Monster
PMlaenasuea linclude stat blocks for any creature you use in
• your adventure that does not appear in the
• .
Adventures must use the template provided.
WheWn BpWub-lDisChed on the Dungeon Masters Guild (or
listed in an event program), your adventure must use
the code to identify it as a Dungeoncraft
Adventure intended for use during this Seasonal
Campaign. This code should appear in the upper left
corner of your cover. (If you intend to write multiple
adventures, then we suggest that you consider using a
• three-letter identifier in you code so people can quickly
find them.
The DDAL Community Created logo and the DMsGuild
• logo must appear on the cover. No other logos should
appear on the cover
All Dungeoncraft Adventures published on the
DMsGuild must abide by the rules provided by the
• DMsGuild in terms of content that can be published in
that marketplace.
Adventures must be written for a single table of players.
IMTPhOeRseT AcaNnTn:o t be epics/multi-table events.
Dungeoncraft Adventures can be removed
from the DMsGuild at any time for failing to meet these
standards, those prescribed by the DMsGuild, or for any
other reason deemed necessary by Wizards of the Coast.
Additionally, any designer(s) publishing a Dungeoncraft
Adventure on the Dungeon Masters Guild or running one
that does not follow these rules can have their ability to
continue to create and publish sanctioned content under
these rules suspended or revoked.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
ersonal use only.
7
===== PAGE 8 =====
Adv. Seed Title Never Too Late For Now
IER DVENTURE EEDS
TAdv. See1d HDooCk A The characters rSun into an awakened rabbit that i
forces threaten his attendance.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Oil of slipperiness, cloak of
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: +1 padded armor (a fine ve
Adv. Seed Title Sticky Little Fingers
Adv. Seed Hook The characters awaken to find that something imp
whom the perpetrator might be is a brilliant yello
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of fly, dark shard
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Wind fan
Adv. Seed Title Lending a Hand
Adv. Seed Hook The characters find a badly injured sprite who clai
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of fire resistance, tal
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Greatclub of warning
Adv. Seed Title So…Thirsty…
Adv. Seed Hook The stream that an elf village has relied upon for a
out why.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: (5) +1 sling bullets, wand of
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Decanter of endless water
Adv. Seed Title Where are We?
Adv. Seed Hook The characters take shelter in an unassuming rui
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of growth, prosthet
Four-Hour Adventure: Restorative ointment (4 do
Adv. Seed Title What a Quagmire
Adv. Seed Hook Under the dark of each new moon, a mysterious
of wondrous treasures inside—though no one tru
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of entangle, orb
Four-Hour Adventure: +1 all-purpose tool
Adv. Seed Title Party Time!
Adv. Seed Hook All of the children in a small thorp have mysterio
the kids mentioned everyone going to a special b
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of faerie fire, ro
Four-Hour Adventure: Hat of disguise (shaped lik
Adv. Seed Title A Tough Sell
Adv. Seed Hook A seemingly friendly fey offers the characters a p
who plant them. He couldn’t tell a bigger lie.
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of animal friendship
Four-Hour Adventure: Bag of tricks
Adv. Seed Title Where the Winds Take Us
Adv. Seed Hook The characters are offered a trip in a splendid ho
into a night of terror.
Adv. Seed Rewards Two-Hour Adventure: (1) unbreakable arrow, fea
Four-Hour Adventure: Wind fan
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
is late for an important event. Unfortunately, nefarious
many fashions
elvet vest)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
portant has been taken from them. The only clue as to
ow feather.
d amulet
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
ims to have been accosted by a creature made of mud.
lking doll
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
a thousand years has run dry, and they can’t seem to figure
f pyrotechnics
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
in, only to find themselves in the Feywild when they awaken.
tic limb (made of wood)
oses remaining)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
shack emerges from the middle of a muddy bog. Rumors tell
uly knows anyone who’s actually entered it.
b of time
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
ously gone missing, and the parents are worried sick. One of
birthday party, but there are no clues other than that.
ope of mending
ke a conical party hat)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
pouch filled with magic acorns, promising great wealth to those
p, lock of trickery
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
ot air balloon, but catastrophe strikes, and their 3-hour tour turns
ather token (feather fall)
ersonal use only.
8
===== PAGE 9 =====
Adv. Seed Title Path of Resistance
Adv. Seed Hook Every path leads to a destination. But some paths le
you can’t leave until you acquire what is waiting th
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Potion of resistance (Force), H
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add adamantine armor (scal
Adv. Seed Title Looking a Gift Horse in the Mouth
Adv. Seed Hook What luck! A fey is here to help the characters. N
any size is great fun to some fey!)
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Pixie dust, charlatan’s die
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add boots of striding and s
Adv. Seed Title Who Goes There?
Adv. Seed Hook Curious creatures have been emerging from break
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: dust of disappearance, cloa
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add figurine of wonderous
Adv. Seed Title Face Off!
IER DVENTURE EEDS
TAdv. See2d HAook A mysterioSus strange r tells a scary story at a taver
the ability to steal their victims’ faces.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: (5) +2 crossbow bolts, armo
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add amulet of health
Adv. Seed Title Dryad Despair
Adv. Seed Hook The characters encounter a dryad in the middle of
treant, was recently chopped down by a band of r
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of blight, dread h
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Armor of resistance (necrot
Adv. Seed Title Woe Unto Ewe
Adv. Seed Hook A distraught hunter claims to be cursed after shoo
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of spirit guardia
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Elven chain
Adv. Seed Title A Host Spurned
Adv. Seed Hook Someone took advantage of Yarnspinner’s hospita
immense spider is desperate to see it returned.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of stoneskin, rub
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Glamoured studded leather
Adv. Seed Title Blood Bath
Adv. Seed Hook A notoriously vicious band of redcaps has filled a p
village takes issue with this and asks the character
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of greater restor
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Ioun stone of awareness
Adv. Seed Title A Draconic Request
Adv. Seed Hook A faerie dragon with a fondness for meat pies has
she reveals her secret recipe. Unfortunately, the b
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of guardian of na
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: +2 moon sickle
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1-4
ead to a destination you don’t know you needed to go and
here for you.
Heward’s handy spice pouch
le mail or chain mail)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1-4
No problem is too small or too great. (Causing problems of
springing (shaped like unicorns’ hooves and fuzzy ankles)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 1 – 4
ks in the thickets of Fablerise.
ak of many fashions
power (silver raven)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10
rn before revealing themselves as an odd fey creature with
or of gleaming (scale)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10
f a blighted forest deep in the throes of despair. Her tree, a
redcaps, and needs the last acorn it shed to return it to life.
helm
tic) (medium armor only)
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10
oting a strange sheep with a golden pelt.
ans, pole of collapsing
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10
ality and has stolen one of the archfey’s favorite books. The
by of the war mage
r
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10
pond with the blood of their victims. Naturally, a nearby
rs for help.
ration, shield of expression
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5 – 10
s kidnapped an elderly baker and refuses to free her unless
baker has forgotten the recipe to a wicked hag.
ature, staff of adornment
ersonal use only.
9
===== PAGE 10 =====
Adv. Seed Title A Fine Suit Adv. Seed Lvl Range
Adv. Seed Hook A huge unseelie fairy has been kidnapping peopl
their plight to fatten them up with the plans of m
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Elixir of health, wand of co
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Staff of withering
Adv. Seed Title Wildest Dreams
Adv. Seed Hook The residents of a small Fey village have been seei
they’ve asked you to investigate why.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: spell scroll of revivify, cloak
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add staff of the woodlands
Adv. Seed Title Feisty Fey Festivities
Adv. Seed Hook Two great fey courts have a mutual celebration pla
ruin the joy.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: Spell scroll of calm emotions
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add glamoured studded lea
Adv. Seed Title Wild Hunt
Adv. Seed Hook Another fey hunting party is planned and some Fey
collateral damage. They seek help.
Adv. Seed Two-Hour Adventure: (5) +2 arrows, dread helm
Rewards Four-Hour Adventure: Add bracers of defense
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand, Playe
Wizards of the Coast product names, and their respective logos are trademarks of Wizards of the Coas
Wizards of the Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of Amer
without the express written permission of Wizards of the Coast.
©2021 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by Hasbro
Stockley Park, Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB11 1ET, UK.
Not for resale. Permission granted to print or photocopy this document for pe
Dungeoncraft Adventures: The Wild Beyond the Witchlight
--- col ---
5 – 10
le from a destitute village. He’s taken advantage of
making a coat from their skin.
onducting
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5-10
ing their dreams (and nightmares) come to life, and
of billowing
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5-10
anned but if they don’t get help soon, their strife may
s, cloak of many fashions,
ather
Adv. Seed Lvl Range 5-10
ywild creatures express fear of becoming prey or
er’s Handbook, Monster Manual, Dungeon Master’s Guide, D&D Adventurers League, all other
st in the USA and other countries. All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of
rica. Any reproduction or unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited
o SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH. Represented by Hasbro Europe, 4 The Square,
ersonal use only.
10