Forgotten Realms Style Guide
The following guidelines are true for the Forgotten Realms, the world in which most products are
set.

Tone
The Forgotten Realms is a hopeful setting. The good guys will eventually win. This hopeful tone
sets the Forgotten Realms apart from settings like Greyhawk (which is cynical) and Dragonlance
(which is a setting of romance and tragedy). While not every moment of a story or image in art
should be hopeful (the villains need their time in the spotlight, and bad things do happen), keep this
tone in mind.

Replace Your Divots
Stories should leave the Forgotten Realms as they found them. (Pack it in. Pack it out.) Stories set in
the Forgotten Realms should not definitively destroy or irrevocably change locations, people, gods,
planes, races as a whole, or other established elements of the setting or brand without special
dispensation. That doesn’t mean that stories can’t have high stakes with important things in
jeopardy. Players of a D&D game have the option of failure or of causing the death or destruction of
important elements of the IP, but there must always be the option of things being restored to order.

Don’t Whitewash the Realms
It’s easy to fall into the trap of making every character have white skin. Most models for fantasy
have done so. Lord of the Rings didn’t have anyone with anything other than white skin, and
besides, elves, dwarves, halflings, and gnomes are white, right?
   No. That’s not right.
   In fact, quite the opposite has been true for a long time in the Forgotten Realms but art has failed
to consistently and appropriately represent the people of the Forgotten Realms.
   Sun Elves. Sun elves have bronze skin. They look well-tanned all the time. Some have blond hair.
Many have black hair.
   Wood Elves. These people have coppery skin tinged with green. Their hair is brown or black.
   Wild Elves. Their skin is dark brown, and their hair ranges from black to light brown.
   Gold Dwarves. Gold dwarves have black hair and brown skin.
   Rock Gnomes. Their skin ranges from a light brown through white to a very light gray.
   Strongheart Halflings. Strongheart halflings are dusky skinned with brown or black hair (think
people from India for tone and color ranges).
   Humans. The Forgotten Realms is a huge world with many earth analogs. Turmish, Tashluta, and
Chult provide sources of humans with black skin and features. Kara-Tur provides all the Asian
ethnicities (people from Wa and Kozakura look like folk from Japan, Koryo has folk who look like
Koreans, and so on). Calimshan, Zakara, and Anauroch give us various Arab ethnicities. People from
Amn and Tethyr look like Spaniards. There are even people who look like Eskimos and Mayans.
Basically, any human race or ethnicity on earth has a home in the Forgotten Realms. Thayans and
Mulhorandi of the upper classes have yellow/sallow skin (not Asian but actually yellow, like people
who are extremely jaundiced).
   It’s important to note that such folk shouldn’t be relegated to their home regions either. When
you set something in Waterdeep, the most cosmopolitan city in the world, there absolutely should
be humans from all over the Realms and various ethnicities in Waterdavian dress. Places that might
seem less cosmopolitan might actually have more reason for folk of other skin colors. Cormyr
seems like a Camelot analog, but it’s very near Turmish, and the Old Empires (analogs of Egypt,
ancient Greece, and Sumer) are a boat ride away.
  Lastly, although someone who is not white might come from a culture different from the area
where your project is set, that does not mean that the person must seem like a foreigner. For
instance, black people from Turmish, Tashluta, and Chult have lived in Waterdeep and the North for
decades (if not centuries) and thus they can dress and speak as natives.

Gender Roles
As a rule, males and females should be depicted in equal measure and doing all the same jobs in
equal status regardless of the race or culture. The woman of the house is just as likely to go to war
as the man. Avoid clichés that reinforce sexist stereotypes about women: the damsel in distress, the
sexy barmaid, the hooker with the heart of gold, the slinky Catwoman-like thief, the woman who
uses enticement to sex as “empowerment,” and so on.
  There are two exceptions: orcs and Northlanders (the Viking types, not just people who live in the
North).
  Orcs: Orc females remain behind with the young when orcs go to war or raiding. It’s a
misogynistic culture.
  Northlanders: Northlanders expect their women and children to remain at home and not be seen
by outsiders (meaning anyone not of their clan). In the home, men and women do all the same
work—both men and women weave, cook, brew, and tend to animals—but women are expected to
stay home when men go fishing or raiding.

Sex and Sexuality
Depictions of sex and romance between characters should be rare in D&D stories. Novels aside,
D&D tends to be like an action movie without any love interests. If sex, sexual orientation, or gender
identity does need to be portrayed, here are the guidelines:
• Keep it PG. Avoid topics such as rape and molestation.
• Homosexuality and bisexuality are just as valid as heterosexuality and should not be depicted as
negative, for humor, or using stereotypes.
• People can have gender identities other than their physical gender, but this should not be
depicted as negative, for humor, or using stereotypes.

Violence and Gore
Dungeons & Dragons has violence at its core, and blood and gore will often be appropriate. As a rule
of thumb, keep it PG. Occasionally more gore will be called for by the subject matter (gnolls
decorate conquered places with slaughtered remains), but ask before you take gore into the R-rated
range.

Technology
While often described as Medieval fantasy, D&D has a mix of technologies from various eras. In the
Forgotten Realms, different locations and cultures have access to different technologies, but large
cities in the North generally have access to the technologies of the Renaissance and before: printing
presses, movable type, hourglasses (called “sandglasses”), magnifying glasses, clocks (large ones),
telescopes, spectacles, paper, windmills, watermills, water screws, sewers, running water (mostly
in nobles’ houses), fountains, and viaducts.
Gears, Gadgets, Clockwork, and Automatons
The islands of Lantan, worshipers of Gond (god of technology), and certain rock gnomes create more advanced
items of technology. When depicting these things, think more in terms of wood and canvass than metal and bolts.
These items should be more like something Leonardo Da Vinci would make, not Victorian-era steampunk.



Guns and Explosives
The Forgotten Realms has smokepowder, which is basically like gunpowder. Its creation is a secret known to only a
few, and it is primarily used for fireworks. People do not use guns or cannons. Smokepowder is not used as an
explosive except in extremely rare circumstances when justified by a story link to a smokepowder source.

Magic Items
Unlike past editions, magic items of all kinds have specific appearances that do not change. A potion
of healing or a vorpal sword always looks the same regardless of who made it. Watch for magic item
descriptions and check them against the item’s appearance in the Dungeon Master’s Guide. If the
item is not in that book, request a description from us.

Races
Below are some important facts to keep in mind about the D&D races. There’s much more to know
about them in order to depict them properly, but these facts are often overlooked.

Elves
Elves live for centuries and any elf in a story is likely a couple centuries old at least. That means the
elf has lived through The Retreat, when elves largely left their traditional lands for Evermeet. Ergo
the elf in the story either elected to stay or came back to the world for some reason. Every elf
should have some gravitas and a history.
  There are several distinct subraces of elves that are different from those described in the Player’s
Handbook and Monster Manual.
  Moon. Moon elves are neither as woodsy as wood elves, nor as magically inclined as sun elves.
They are generally less aloof than sun elves and more willing to engage with other races than both
sun and wood elves. Moon elves are the most impulsive of the elf subraces, with a strong distaste
for complacency and isolation.
  Sun. Sun elves are the most magically inclined of the elf subraces. Their wizards have been
performing mighty feats of arcane magic for millennia. Sun elves are also the least inclined toward
nature and the wilderness. Although more inclined to protect and live with the natural world than
the typical human or dwarf, they have built great cities of stone in the past, and they commonly
shape and tame nature to suit their needs.
  Wood. Long ago, different types of elves were forced out of their homelands and became
wanderers, living together amid nature as they moved rather than building new cities. These
peoples blended, communicated, and created their own culture, becoming wood elves over the
generations. As various elven empires fell—and especially with the advent of the Retreat—wood
elves have resettled the lands abandoned by their cousins. They see themselves as protectors of
these ancient elven homelands, but they are protective of elven right to the place, not the buildings
of the past. They have lost the urge to build and replace nature with walls and palaces; even the
cities built by their elven kin seem to be foolish to the wood elves. The forest is the true home of the
elves, and those forests are what need protecting.
   Wood elves aren’t as winsome and flighty as their description in the Monster Manual and Player’s
Handbook describes. They are are calm, serene, and difficult to surprise. Their patience is legendary.
As a people wood elves are largely seen as level-headed and somewhat grim. Arousing strong
emotions in wood elves is not something that is easily done, although many do have a strong
aversion for large cities.
   Wood elves have a notable disinterest in the arcane arts. To a wood elf, the wizard's spells are
little different from the mason's castle walls or the tiller's plow—a means of controlling the natural
world, which is contrary to the common ethic of living in harmony with nature rather than trying to
dominate it that so many wood elves espouse. They do however, take a great interest in the nature
magic of druids and thus have more druids among them than any other elves except perhaps the
wild elves.
   Drow: Drow largely map to the material in the Monster Manual but the reason for their decent
into the Underdark is more complex (sun elves made a genocidal attack that destroyed an entire
dark elf empire, thus provoking the dark elves to ally with demons). They are also very matriarchal,
with males subordinate and downtrodden.
   Wild. Wild elves are almost never seen outside their forest homes in the hot south-central areas
of Faerûn (Chondalwood, the Forest of Amtar, the Shaar). Like the wood elves, wild elves lost their
empires millennia ago, but unlike the wood elves, the wild elves severed connections from their
elven cousins, becoming insular and savage. The wild elves were always close to nature, even more
so than other elves, but they have forgotten many of the high arts and lore of their people, choosing
stealth and survival over building and book learning. Wild elves are a quiet, withdrawn people who
neither like outsiders nor tolerate any offense to their person. They are quick to violence if
provoked.
   Avariel. Avariel are winged elves and extremely small in number, coming from just one
settlement in the world that is far to the north of the center of Faerûn (near Sossal). They should
not be used in stories.

Dwarves
There are two subraces of dwarves and the duergar (or gray dwarves).
  Shield. Like the elves, the shield dwarves lost their great empires and kingdoms, many having
fallen long ago. Now they live in the remnants of those grand empires or seek to discover and
rebuild old glories. They tend to be irascible and boisterous when happy, and dour when not.
  Gold. Gold dwarves never lost their greatness. Their mighty empire in the Great Rift has
weathered many dangers and endured. They come mainly from south-central Faerûn and thus are
often foreigners to the North drawn by the opportunity to claim great wealth. Gold dwarves are
typically flush with cash, privilege, and pride.

Halflings
There are two halfling subraces in the Forgotten Realms.
  Lightfoot: The folk of Faerûn are more familiar with the lightfoot halflings than with the
stronghearts, primarily because the lightfoots are the most numerous and widely traveled of all the
halflings. Nearly every human community of any size larger than a village has at least a few halfling
residents. When most Faerûnians think of halflings, the lightfoots are the people that most often
leap to mind.
  Lightfoots a naturally curious people, always wondering what might lie around the next bend or
what stories a new person might be able to tell them. While lightfoot halflings can be as dour or sad
as any other race, they certainly prefer to be happy and often bounce back from emotional setbacks
with surprising alacrity.
   Members of the lightfoot subrace wander out of an innate desire. It is not unknown for individual
lightfoot halflings or even entire families to decide that, after living in the same place for decades,
they want to move on to someplace else. They seem to experience a habitual need to see many
different places and enjoy a variety of experiences.
   Strongheart: Strongheart halflings have a culture unique in the world—a semi-nomadic lifestyle,
in which businesses, families, and even entire clans move freely and independently from place to
place. They have homes, farms, and towns that they have lived in for decades and even centuries,
but as a people they migrate around them according to time-honored schedules, treating them as
shared space. This fusion of wanderlust and stability is a source of wonderment and confusion for
visitors, who find it difficult to comprehend how a society can enjoy such seemingly whimsical
mobility while retaining any viable structure. For their part, most of the stronghearts cannot
understand why anyone would want to tie themselves permanently to any one community or
structure for their entire lives.
   Their strange duality of nature, consisting of a desire to move about freely with a liking for
permanent structures and settlements, has produced some unusual outlooks among the
stronghearts. Their viewpoint stresses cooperation above all other traits, and the ability to work as
a team is the most valued behavior in their lands. Cooperation transcends many boundaries, and
even strangers of whom the locals are suspicious can earn themselves considerable credit and
tolerance by demonstrating a willingness to cooperate

Gnomes
There are two subraces of gnomes on the surface and then the subterranean svirfneblin (deep
gnomes). Rock gnomes are tinkerers and alchemists (not steampunk scientists) as well as
illusionists and tricksters. They’re intellectuals with various quirks. Forest gnomes are reclusive
and peaceful woodsmen and animal lovers who use illusions to hide. They’re quiet and self-
reflective.
   Gnomes never play a large role in history. They have not founded nations, nor do they build great
cities. They are not a numerous race, and indeed, they survive and thrive by keeping a low profile.
Avoiding the notice of larger folk obsessed with empires and mighty magic, gnomes have quietly
spread across the world in tiny settlements and hidden villages that often go completely unnoticed
by their neighbors.
   Gnomes sometimes play the role of intermediary between other races or peoples. Few count the
gnomes as their friends, but even fewer consider the gnomes their enemies. Gnomes rarely become
embroiled in war, remaining neutral in such things because wars are usually fought over goals
about which the gnomes care little, such as rights of commerce and settlement, or the drive to
achieve and wield power in the world at large.
   Rock Gnomes: When most people think of gnomes, they think of rock gnomes. Unlike their
reclusive cousins, the deep gnomes and the forest gnomes, rock gnomes are an inquisitive and
loquacious people. They are renowned throughout the world as technicians, alchemists, and
inventors. Yet most do not care much for living in larger cities, where their talents are in high
demand, and prefer the rolling hills of the countryside. But anywhere they find themselves, they
display an amazing zest for life and all the pleasures it holds.
   Rock gnomes are far friendlier and more outgoing than the other gnome subraces. They are well
known for their love of jokes and pranks, as well as their fondness for finely made things.
   Rock gnomes are generally optimistic. They view the world as a puzzle that the gods—in their
infinite wisdom—have laid out before them as the ultimate challenge, one that cannot ever be fully
met. It is their greatest joy to be involved in the unraveling of the mysteries of creation, an act they
feel brings them closer to the gods with each passing day.
   In their adolescence, rock gnomes are encouraged to dabble in as many different things as
possible. Eventually, each gnome finds something that truly intrigues him or her, fires the
imagination, and sets the gnome on the path of a career that may last the rest of the gnome’s life.
Almost every rock gnome had a passion for what she does for a living, which is one of the reasons
that they have such positive dispositions.
  While most gnomes are homebodies at heart, a number simply can’t resist the urge to go out into
the world to explore. Inquisitive by nature, gnomes often find themselves almost compelled to do
everything they can to learn about anything they want.
  Forest Gnomes: Forest gnomes are shy and elusive, shunning contact with other races except
when dire emergencies threaten their beloved homes. They know the secret names and languages
of the forest’s creatures, and can pass through their woodlands without leaving a trace. They often
befriend small animals, relying on them for information about threats that might infringe on their
lands.
  Forest gnomes are so reclusive that many times bigger people have “discovered” them, only to
find that the forest gnomes have been living nearby for centuries. Forest gnomes are so quiet and
painfully shy that they go to great lengths to avoid contact with others unless there is a great need
to break their silence. Whereas the rock gnomes are friendly and loquacious and the deep gnomes
are sullen and reserved, the forest gnomes are practically invisible, the wallflowers of the gnomes.
They have a great love for nature, particularly deep and quiet forests far from civilization. For this
reason, many people—including other kinds of gnomes—have never seen a forest gnome. Most
forest gnomes are extremely private, preferring to simply be left alone by other peoples. When
among their own kind, they are a bit less reserved.
  Forest gnomes maintain a strong tradition of instruction in magic, particularly illusions. While not
all forest gnomes have the knack for wizardry, generations of devotion to the craft has put magic in
their blood and all forest gnomes can craft minor illusions. In private they use this ability to amuse
one another with simple pranks and complicated games only possible with magic, but when danger
threatens forest gnomes work together to make illusions that hide their homes or mislead enemies.
  Svirfneblin: Svirfneblin, or deep gnomes, live amid the dangers of the Underdark deep beneath
the surface of the world in twisting warrens and sculpted caverns. They survive by virtue of their
stealth, watchfulness, and tenacity.
  Deep gnomes are gnarled and callused folk, with little fat at all on their wiry bodies. Their skin is
the color of the rocks among which they live, almost as if they sprang directly from the stones
themselves. They have dark gray eyes, tending toward black. Their hair is of a similar color,
although it’s only seen on the women, as the men are entirely bald and beardless.
  Svirfneblin keep to themselves out of fear of outsiders—a fear born from numerous poor
experiences with such people. To a deep gnome, the only people you can trust are other deep
gnomes from your village, and preferably from your family. All others are best avoided. With
strangers, most deep gnomes are reserved and suspicious, almost to a fault. However, when they
are alone with their own kind, they are friendly and respectful to each other. Few people from
outside a svirfneblin community have ever seen this more pleasant side of the deep gnomes. For
their part, the deep gnomes would be horrified to find themselves observed by outsiders, and they
find such a person staring at them—or even looking directly at them—quite rude.
  All gnomes pay homage to a pantheon of gnome deities led by the trickster-hero, Garl Glittergold,
but svirfneblin are most devoted to the Deep Brother, Callarduran. Legend has it that Callarduran
was the first to discover the beauty of gems, having picked up a rough stone and absentmindedly
rubbed it to smooth brilliance in his pocket. He went into a cave in pursuit of more, and the gnomes
who followed him became the svirfneblin. Deep gnomes still pursue gems of all types in their
tunneling, having particular regard for large emeralds, which with the blessings of their priests they
can enchant to summon earth elementals.
Half-Elves
Half-elves aren’t the diplomats described in the Player’s Handbook and Monster Manual. They are
instead individuals trapped between two worlds—human and elf—neither of which entirely
welcomes them.
   Except in a few places in Faerûn, half elves do not appear in great numbers. Each is the result of a
union between elf and human, but such relationships often come to sad ends as an elf outlives the
other parent or when cultural differences drive parents apart. Some half-elves are the result of
briefer encounters between elf and human or between two half-elves, but this is extremely rare.
   This means that although there might be similar themes of prejudice, tragedy, and of homes and
friends left behind in youth, the upbringing of each half-elf is unique, and the way in which the half-
elf emphasizes the qualities of one parent race or the other differ. One half-elf might think and act
more like an elf due to being raised among them, while another might act more like a human, and
still another might act more elven than an elf in order to separate himself from the humans he grew
up with.
   Half-elves have at least one elven parent or grandparent, or two half-elven parents. To put it
another way, the child of a half-elf and a human will be human, unless the half-elf parent was the
child of a full-blooded elf. Unless a half-elven line marries into other elven or half-elven families,
their elf characteristics fade in a couple generations. On occasion elven traits can reappear in
otherwise human children born several generations later, but half-elves of such remote descent are
very rare.
   While elves and half-elves are respected and admired in many parts of Faerûn, humans in lands
where elves are not commonly encountered can be resentful of elven blood. Elves are graceful,
attractive, long-lived, mysterious, and skilled with mighty magic, and humans who do not know
them well can easily come to regard elves—and, by extension, half-elves—with envy and fear. In
places such as Silverymoon or the Dalelands, a half-elf’s race is nothing remarkable, and she faces
little or no bigotry. In lands where there is a long history of elven-human conflict, such as Tethyr or
Sembia, her elven blood marks her as different and dangerous, with all the fears and suspicions one
might expect. On the other hand, half-elves born in elven communities almost always experience
patronizing prejudice instead of fear. A half-elf will not live as long, nor be as nimble, and elves
expect half-elves to be unwisely brash and impatient.
   Most half-elves are a bit distant, used to being cast in the role of outsiders. Many half-elves
respond to the suspicions and slights of their human neighbors by staying well away from human
civilization, preferring a solitary life in the wildernesses of Faerûn. Others instead take up a life of
travel, never staying in one spot long enough for racial prejudices to distance them from the folk
around them.

Half-Orcs
Half-orcs are originally the product of a union between orc and human, or more rarely orc and elf or
half-elf. There are rare places where orcs and barbaric humans have lived in close association
where such unions might occur through mutual respect, but most half-orcs have the tragedy of rape
in their past. However, orc blood runs strong. It takes a few generations for orc blood to be so
diluted that a child might be born looking fully human, and even then, a sibling might appear to be a
half-orc.
  Whether by nurture or nature, half-orcs tend to be sullen and quick-tempered. Half-orcs have
uphill battles to fight when interacting with most other races. Among orcs they are considered
weak and cowardly by nature. Among others they are feared as violent and thought to be stupid.
Most half-orcs react this prejudice with anger. They make friends only with difficulty. Once trust is
established, it is often a fleeting thing that can be fractured with one misinterpreted comment.
Tieflings
Like half-orcs and helf-elves, tieflings are quite rare. But unlike both those races, tiefling blood
never thins. The child of any tiefling looks like a tiefling no matter how many generations ago an
ancestor has congress with a devil. All tieflings are visibly touched by the evil of the Nine Hells.
That’s not easy to live down. The conflict their heritage causes—within themselves and with
others—tends to define who they are.

Dragonborn
Except for Tymanther and the region around it, dragonborn are extremely rare.

NPC Races
When choosing a race for an NPC consider the story impact of the races. Any exceptional character might be of any
of the races noted above, but a shopkeeper, the local sage, or other inconsequential figures in a story should be
from a race common to the setting, which in most cases is a human, a halfling, a dwarf, or a rock gnome. Elves,
half-elves, half-orcs, forest gnomes, tieflings, and dragonborn all should have some story weight and not be simply
a choice for the sake of variety.

Classes
There a lot more to know about the various classes of D&D, but below are some elements to keep in
mind when depicting characters with a D&D class in the Forgotten Realms.
  Spellcasters in General: Except for extremely unusual circumstances (such as a college of
wizardry) spellcasters are individuals. They have personalities and personal stories and unique
spell lists. You shouldn’t encounter the same wizard stat block in an adventure used to represent
different wizards, for instance.
  Barbarians. The Forgotten Realms has cultures described as barbarians and D&D has the class
called barbarian, but they are not synonymous. People with the barbarian class are special warriors
even in barbarian tribes.
  Clerics. Clerics are special individuals gifted with divine power by a deity, but they don’t have the
gods on speed dial nor are the gods constantly watching their every move. Clerics of a deity can go
astray of a deity’s ethos or even betray their deity. Judgment of such infractions might be immediate
or saved until the afterlife, based upon the whim of the deity.
  Druids. Druids are not clerics by another name and do not devote themselves to a single deity.
(The only exception is druids of the Moonshaes, who worship the Great Mother, a deity embodied
by their islands.) Instead, druids (regardless of race) pay homage to the “First Circle,” which is a
pantheon of human gods that represent the basic elements of the natural world (Shar for night and
darkness, Selune for the moon, Silvanus for forests, Talos for storms, Kossuth for fire, and so on).
Druids from non-human races often pay homage to nature-related deities of their own as well, but
the power of druidic magic stems from the First Circle. Most druid characters should acknowledge a
circle of druids from which they originate, the circle being a group of druids that serves all the
druids that are part of it as a body of wisdom, lore, and news.
  Monks. Monks are not monastic priests in the Christian sense, but meditative martial artists in
the Eastern sense. Monks are rare in Faerûn and quite common in Kara-Tur. There are dozens if not
hundreds of orders of monks in Kara-Tur, but Faerûn hosts only a few. Most monks of Faerûn are
associated with a human religious order, acting as protectors of holy sites and sometimes as
enforcers or assassins. Some of the few Faerûnian monastic orders are Dark Moon, Shining Hand,
Yielding Way, Yellow Rose, and Sun Soul.
  Paladins. Paladins are warriors of unusual virtue and piety rewarded by a good god with divine
power. Paladins follow a common code of ethics but paladins of different deities emphasize
different aspects. (A paladin of Sune would emphasize aspects of courtly love and courtesy,
whereas a paladin of Tyr would be more concerned with justice and fair treatment of foes.) As with
clerics, paladins can go astray of their code, but paladins are typically judged more swiftly and
harshly by their gods.
  Rangers. Low-level rangers can be depicted like mountain men and wilderness guides. Once a
ranger has spellcasting, that ranger has been chosen by a nature deity and granted power. Rangers
with spellcasting should show devotion to a specific nature deity depending on the ranger’s
alignment (Malar, Shaundakul, Gwaeron Windstrom. Milikki, Silvanus, Eldath, Shialia).
  Sorcerer. The source of a sorcerer’s power should be a significant element of the character’s
story.
  Warlocks. Warlocks always have a patron and a bargain. Those things should be a huge part of
such a character and that character’s part in any plot. Ask for appropriate options for a patron and
details. Note that not all the Great Old One patrons mentioned in the Player’s Handbook are
appropriate to the Forgotten Realms. Of the ones mentioned, Ghaunadar, called That Which Lurks;
Kezef, the Chaos Hound, and Dendar, the Night Serpent, exist in Faerûn.
  Wizards. In addition to a spellbook, a wizard in the Forgotten Realms crafts a sigil that is the
wizard’s symbol and is used in various spells and rituals to represent the wizard. Also, it is
extremely rare for a wizard to have a familiar.

Game Terms in the World
Most game terms like “saving throw,” “level,” and so on are obviously not something people in the
world use. Below are some special notes about terminology where the distinction is less clear.
  Adventurer. “Adventurer” is a word that describes people of a certain occupation or lifestyle,
that being people who brave dangers to make their fortunes. It’s a broad term, not a specific one:
Just as a bodyguard or assassin is a type of mercenary, tomb robber and explorer are types of
adventurer.
  Barbarian. “Barbarian” is used for anyone thought to be barbaric, not just people who have the
class. Individuals who have the class and can therefor enter a battle rage are often referred to by
another name that sets them apart (berserker, dwarven battlerager, and so on).
  Bard. This word is reserved for people who have the bard class. They have magical powers that
regular minstrels, musicians, and singers lack.
  Class. “Class” is not a term anyone would use to refer to people that have a class in the game
sense.
  Cleric. A priest is anyone who devotes themselves to the service of a deity and/or the
maintenance of a shrine or temple (to one or more deities). A “cleric” is someone who is granted
spells by a particular deity. People in the world would call a cleric a priest, but they would not call a
priest without powers a cleric.
  Druid. A druid is always a member of the class. People do use the word “druid” to refer to them.
  Fighter. People in the world use the word “fighter” like we do. It’s a word for someone who
fights; a boxer is a fighter. An adventurer who has the fighter class would likely refer to himself as a
warrior.
  Forgotten Realms. “Forgotten Realms” or “the Realms” is not a term people in the world know or
use.
  Mage. “Mage” is nonspecific a term used in the world to for arcane spellcasters. It most often
refers to wizards, but it can be used for sorcerers and warlocks.
  Monk. “Monk” is a term used like we use it. It refers both to people trained in a martial art at a
monastery setting (and therefor a member of the monk class), and it refers to members of a
religious order that have a European-style monastic lifestyle.
  Paladin. Paladins are all members of the paladin class. They are recognized as individuals imbued
with special powers.
  Ranger. Rangers are members of the ranger class, not merely woodsmen, mountaineers, or
survivalists. They are imbued with special powers.
  Sorcerer, Warlock, and Wizard. These terms are distinct and have separate meanings, referring
to members of the respective classes. However, to many people in the world they are synonymous.
Anyone with knowledge of the arcane arts knows the distinguishing elements, but to common
people, any of these terms might be ascribed to an arcane spellcaster. That said, the terms should be
used accurately when confusion might arise: An NPC’s dialog should not say “sorcerer” when in fact
the person to which the NPC refers is a warlock unless the intent is to confuse the audience.

Religion
Below are a few notes to keep in mind for depictions of religion in the Forgotten Realms.
  Polytheism. People in the Forgotten Realms are polytheistic. They worship and acknowledge
many gods for a variety of reasons. Various races and cultures favor some sets of gods over others,
but all acknowledge the existence of other deities than those they favor.
  Temples and Shrines. The temples of deities in the Forgotten Realms do not look like Christian
churches. They do not have pews. People do not attend Sunday service. The appearance of the
worship place of a deity or a number of deities will depend on the deities involved. Many deities do
not even have structures built for worshipers to go to (Eldath is honored at sacred ponds. Talos,
god of storms and natural disasters, does not typically have temples built in his honor.)
  Priests vs. Clerics. A priest is anyone who decides to dedicate themselves to honoring a deity and
maintaining the rites and traditions of the religion. Most temples and shrines are attended by
priests, not clerics. Clerics are holy warriors specially gifted by a god (or gods) with divine power.
That power has a purpose, and its rare that the purpose would be to tend to a building.
  Distant Gods. Although gods have walked the world in the past, they are now more distant and
unknowable. Stories can focus on the activities of the faithful of the deities and what they do in their
names, but should not focus on what the gods themselves are doing or what the gods want.


Formerly Dead Deities: Temples and the Faithful
With the Sundering ending in roughly the fall of 1487, it doesn't give the faithful of the returned deities a lot of
time to reassert themselves. So if there's a priest of Jergal or a paladin of Tyr in a story, that person is on the
vanguard of the faithful who return to the worship of the god. The person either felt the touch of the diety
personally, met someone who had who converted them, or heard stories of the Chosen of that deity during the
Sundering.
    Similarly, if there's a temple in a location that is dedicated to one of the newly returned deities, think about its
origin. It’s unlikely a group “kept the faith” for more than a century. If it is from a 3E or 2E source, then it might still
be abandoned, taken over by some other inhabitants, or used for the worship of other similar deities in the interim.
If it's a new creation for the setting, then the faithful might have taken over an old structure or it might be a new
building.
    Always check if a god was dead before the Sundering. Gods known to be alive at the start of the Sundering are
listed in the 4th Edition Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting, but that list doesn’t contain all deities that could be
alive (monster deities being the most obvious exception). Please ask if you’re not certain.



Time and the Calendar
The Faerûnian year is 365 days long. The year is divided into twelve months of thirty days—loosely
coinciding with the waxing and waning of Selune, the moon of Toril—and five annual holidays. In
lieu of weeks, each month is divided into three tendays, also known as rides. Once every four years,
Shieldmeet is added to the Calendar of Harptos as a “leap day” immediately following Midsummer
night.
  Particular days of the tenday have no special names. Instead, days of the tenday are denoted by
counting from the beginning of the tenday. For example, “first day,” “second day,” “third day,” and
so on (or alternatively “one-day,” “two-day” etc.). There is no concept of the weekend as a special
time when businesses close or people stop work.
  Days of the month are noted as numbers followed by the month name. For example, sages might
record a date as occurring on “1 Mirtul” or “27 Uktar” or “Midsummer.”
  Days are 24 hours long.
  Keeping Time. Most people do not keep track of time. The sun does that for them. They are
typically not aware of the concept of hours or minutes. People are accustomed to loose times like
“mid morning” or “nigh sunset.” If two people plan to meet at a particular time, they expect it to be
hazy and that someone might be waiting or arrive early.
  The concept of “hours” and “minutes” exists in places where wealthy people use clocks, but
mechanical clocks are often unrealiable and they are rarely set for exactly the same time. If a local
temple or civic structure has a clock, people refer to hours as “bells,” as in “I’ll meet you at seven
bells.”


 The Calendar of Harptos
 Earth Month        Faerûn Month                                Common Name
 December           Hammer                                      Deepwinter (new year starts Hammer 1)
                    Annual Holiday: Midwinter (Winter Solstice)
 January            Alturiak                                    The Claw of Winter
 February           Ches                                        The Claw of Sunsets
 March              Tarsahk                                     The Claw of Storms
                    Annual Holiday: Greengrass (Spring Equinox)
 April              Mirtul                                      The Melting
 May                Kythorn                                     The Time of Flowers
 June               Flamerule                                   Summertide
                    Annual Holiday: Midsummer (Summer Solstice)
                    Quadrannual Holiday: Shieldmeet
 July               Eleasis                                     Highsun
 August             Elient                                      The Fading
                    Annual Holiday: Highharvestide
 September          Marpenoth                                   Leaffall
 October            Uktar (Autumn Equinox, 1st day)             The Rotting
                    Annual Holiday: The Feast of the Moon
 November           Nightal                                     The Drawing Down


Flora
All the normal earthly plants can be found on Toril, but there are some plants unique to the setting.
  Blueleaf. Recognizable by the eerie, gleaming blue color of their many-pointed leaves, blueleafs
(not “blueleaves”) bend in winds or under ice rather than breaking, often forming snow tunnels that
shelter winter travelers. Blueleafs grow close together in thick stands, reaching 40 feet in height but
rarely attaining thick trunks.
  Blueleaf wood is durable, and the sap and crushed leaves yield a vivid blue dye much favored in
cloak making in the North. When burned, it yields beautiful leaping blue flames (prized in inns and
taverns as “mood” illumination for tale-tellers and minstrels). Cut blueleaf has a blue hue when
“green” and a gray-blue color when dried.
   Blueleaf is found all over the north.
   Duskwood. Duskwood trees grow straight and tall, reaching 60’ feet in height. Their trunks are
dark, smooth, and bare; all of their tiny branches are in a crown at the top of each tree. They have
slim silvery leaves. Their name comes from the dark, eerie appearance of stands of duskwoods.
Under their black bark is smoky grey wood that is as hard as iron, and resistant to fire (smoldering
rather than blazing, so that they survive many forest fires and the axes of woodcutters seeking
firewood). It could be found growing all over Faerûn. They gow in densely packed groves which
ended up looking a bit eerie.
   Chuichu. Chuichu trees are found mainly in the forests of the Dalelands. They resemble miniature
hickories, about three feet tall. Chuichu trees produce cone-shaped yellow berries that dissolve in
water to make a delicious, cinnamon-flavored beverage.
   Helmthorn. A vinelike ground shrub that sometimes cloaks other bushes and dead trees,
helmthorn has dark, waxy green leaves and bristling black thorns. As long as human hands, these
sharp, durable thorns are often used as crude needles or dart points. Helmthorn berries are indigo
in hue, edible (tart in flavor), and often harvested even when frozen or withered for use in
winemaking. Helmthorn is very hardy and grows throughout Faerûn, providing food for many.
   Shadowtop. The soaring giants of Faerûnian forests, shadowtops can grow 2 feet a year and top
out at 90 feet. A full-grown shadowtop flares out to a diameter of 10 feet or more at its base, its
trunk surrounded by many pleatlike ridges. Shadowtops are named for the dense clusters of
feathery leaves at the tops of their trunks. Shadowtop leaves are irregular in shape and have copper
undersides and deep green upper surfaces.
   Shadow-wood is fibrous and tough, but unsuitable for carving or structural work because under
stress it splits down its length into splayed fibers. These fibers are valued in rope making (a few
added to the twist improves the strength and durability of a completed coil) and burns slowly but
cleanly, generating a very hot fire with little smoke. This makes it ideal for cooking.
   Shadow-wood is much used in the making of magical staffs, rods, and wands. Shadowtops are
found in all humid areas across Faerûn.
   Silverbark. Silverbark trees flourish in wet ground and deep shadowy ravines. They have thin
trunks three to four inches in diameter, are straight, and seldom grow more than a dozen feet tall—
serving the poor as poles, staves, and (with whittled points hardened in a slow fire) spears or
battle-stakes. Silverbark is plentiful and grows in thickets. Its silvery bark crumbles and pulls loose
easily; an exposed tree dries out thoroughly, becoming brittle and weak, unsuitable for lance shafts,
fence rails, or building work, within a year. Its large, oval, pointed-tipped leaves are deep red
(purple at the roots), waxy, and durable; they are sometimes used to wrap small game, or to carry
twigs.
   Suth. Suth are graybark trees with olive-green leaves. They grow almost horizontally and then
double back to angle in another direction. If a few suth trees grow together, their branches
intertwine until they are inextricably entangled, forming a screen or wall barring passage to all
things that can’t fly over the tangled trees or scuttle under their lowest branches. Suth leaves are
long, soft, and fluffy, but spike-ended.
   Suth wood is very hard and durable, so hard that it’s difficult to work without the finest tools.
Thin sheets of this wood retain astonishing strength for decades, and thus are favored for use in
book covers. Suth is also the preferred wood for shields since it never shatters and doesn’t catch
fire if soaked in water before battle. A crushing blow might crack a suth-wood shield but won’t
cause it to fly apart. Suth wood is naturally a reddish brown.
   The name of this tree may be a corruption of the word “south.” Suth are found along the edges of
the Shaar, in the woods of Chondath, and farther south in Faerûn.
  Weirwood. Weir trees resemble oaks but have leaves that are brown (with a silver sheen) on
their uppers and velvety black beneath. If undisturbed, weir trees grow into huge, many-branched
forest giants. Weirwood won’t ignite in normal (non- magical) fire and is resilient and durable. It’s
favored in the making of musical instruments because of the unmistakable warm, clear tone it
imparts. Weirwood is a dark brown when dried.
  Weirwood can be used as a replacement for oak or holly in any spell. It grows throughout Faerûn
but is very rare. Most trees are now found deep in large forests and actively protected by dryads,
treants, druids, and rangers.
  Zalantar. Often called blackwood in the North because of its jet-black wood and bark, the
zalantar tree has a central root and eight or more trunks that branch out from the root at ground
level like the splayed fingers of a hand. The trees may reach 60 feet in height, but are usually half
that. Their leaves are white through beige.
  Zalantar wood is strong yet easily worked and sees much use in southern buildings and the
making of wagons, litters, and wheels. Southern wizards and sorcerers use durable and handsome
zalantar wood almost exclusively in the making of rods, staffs, and wands.
  This subtropical species is rarely seen north of the Shaar. It is plentiful along the shores of Chult
and the southern coasts of Faerûn and seems to grow in any terrain short of mountainous.

Human Languages
There are easily over two dozen human languages and various human dialects. But because pretty
much everyone speaks Common, and to make consuming a Forgotten Relams product easier, it’s
likely best that an electronic game, film, novel, and even D&D RPG product ignores that another
language is spoken unless it is using the idea to inform a spoken accent, or a language barrier is for
some reason desirable.
   Below is a sampling of the various human languages and where you can find them spoken.
LANGUAGE          AREA OR PEOPLE
Aglarondan       Aglarond                                Lantanese    Lantan
Akûrian          Samarach, Thindol, Tashluta,            Laothan      Malatra
                 the Black and Mhair Jungles,            Midani       Zakhara, Bedine nomads of
                 Nanubel, Mhairhetel                                  Anauroch
Alzhedo          Calimshan                               Mulhorandi   Mulhorand
Bothii           Uthgardt barbarians,                    Nexalan      Maztica
                 Hartsvale                               Rashemi      Rashemen
Chessentan       Chessenta                               Reghedjic    Reghedmen (Icewind Dale
Chondathan Central Faerûn from the                                    Barbarians)
                 Sword Coast to the Sea of               Shaaran      The Shaar
                 Fallen Stars (Cormyr,                   Shou         Shou Lung, T'u Lung, Ra-Khati,
                 Dalelands, Waterdeep, Sembia,                        Tabot
                 and so on)                              Tashalan     Tashalar
Chultan          Chult                                   Thayan       Thay
Damaran          Damara, Vaasa                           Thorasta     Western Heartlands, Baldur’s
Dambrathan Dambrath                                                   Gate
Durpari          Durpar                                  Tuigan       Hordelands
Halruaan         Halruaa                                 Turmic       Turmish
Illuskan         The North (The Savage                   Uluik        Ice Hunters, Ulutiun
                 Frontier)                               Untheric     Unther
Koryo            Koryo                                   Wa-an        Wa
Kozakuran        Kozakura                                Waelan       Moonshae Isles
The Common Tongue
All speaking peoples, including the humans of various lands, possess a native tongue. In addition, all humans and
many nonhumans speak Common as a second language. Common grew from a kind of pidgin Chondathan and is
most closely related to that language, but it is far simpler and less expressive. Nuances of speech, naming, and
phrasing are better conveyed in the older, more mature languages, since Common is little more than a trade
language.
  The great advantage of Common, of course, is its prevalence. Everybody in the Heartlands speaks Chondathan,
and thus speaks Common well enough to get by in any but the most esoteric conversations. Even in remote areas,
just about everybody knows enough Common to speak it badly.
  For the purposes of electronic games and film, it’s simplest to assume that Common is English, and that
everyone uses it as their everyday language. Other languages might be used to inform an accent or provide a
necessary language barrier.

Alphabets
The language symbology of earth—be it the Roman letters of English, the hieroglyphs of Egypt, or
kanji—does not exist in the Forgotten Realms. There are alalogous written languages of symbol for
many cultures (Egyptian, Chinese, Mayan, and so on), but they are not the same. Even though that is
true, for electronic games and other products where consumers must be able to read elements, you
should probably use English. In any event, none of the fantasy languages have been developed into
true languages (although we do have some words and phrases worked out for many of them).
  Thorass: Thorass is the direct ancestor of today’s Common tongue as a spoken language. Though
no one speaks Thorass anymore, its alphabet survives as the alphabet of Common and many other
tongues.
  Espruar: Espruar is the moon elven alphabet. It was adopted by sun elves, drow, and the other
elven peoples thousands of years ago.
  Dethek: Dethek is the dwarven runic script. Dwarves seldom write on that which can perish
easily. They inscribe runes on metal sheets or carve in stone. The lines in all Dethek characters are
straight to facilitate their being carved in stone. Aside from spaces between words and slashes
between sentences, punctuation is ignored. If any part of the script is painted for contrast or
emphasis, names of beings and places are picked out in red while the rest of the text is colored
black or left as unadorned grooves.
  Others: There are also scripts for Draconic, Celestial, and Infernal.

Forgotten Realms Phrases
Below are some phrases common to speah in the Forgotten Realms.
  Well met. The most often used greeting, particularly between strangers of a different race or
those of whom one is unsure.
  Well again. Between business associates or acquaintances, (i.e. we’ve greeted before—hence the
“again”—and you look well) is usually used; if one is annoyed, curt, or sarcastic, one usually just
says, “Again” (i.e. “we meet again” or “you again!”).
  Olore. (Oh-LOR-ay) Well met/Good day, as travelers in the Inner Sea lands say; “Olore to you, my
friends.”
  Until swords part. Warriors’ farewell throughout the Realms.
  Until next, may your sword be ever wet, and your bottom dry. Parting of the pirates of the
Inner Sea.
  Alavairthae! (Al-ah-VARE-thay, or “May your skill prevail”) the Red Wizards of Thay, in giving
their farewells.
  Amarast! (Ah-mah-RAST) Meaning “fare well until next we meet,” a saying of the sailors of the
Shining South.
  Sweet water and light laughter until next. A farewell used by elves.
  Aluve (Ah-LOO-veh) “I/we leave you” in Drow.
  Axe high, friend. I go. Dwarven farewell.
  Forges warm, friend. Gnomish farewell.
  Good morning, and good day after that! Don’t let anything curl your hair! (to which is
sometimes added) “Ware that Big Folk, and mind the goblins too!” as the Halflings speak to each
other. To others, they usually say, “Gods smile! (upon you).”
  Braeunk vhos trolkh! (If you die while I’m gone, do it quietly) Hobgoblin, with the unspoken
addendum “because I wouldn’t want to miss the fun.”

Faerûnian Names
Faerûn is vast. Among humans alone, its inhabitants bear literally thousands upon thousands of
names. Some folk have no surnames, others have a common clan name, and others have a
“son/daughter of” appellation.
   In Tharsult, Tashalar, and the Border Kingdoms, the word “sar” is much used. It means “of the
blood of,” and denotes a famous ancestor—or falsely claimed ancestor—so that a farmer might be
“Baer sar Thardizar,” after the famous warlord of centuries ago.
   Older usages such as “of the” and the name of a trade or place (such as Ruthrar o’ the Forge and
Sammert o’ the Hollow) are falling out of favor and are now rarely heard. Only wizards and the
most haughty adventurers use personal achievements in their names, such as Dastrin of the Three
Thunders or Belgaert of the Deadly Stand, and this, too, is dying out.
 Occupations can be seen within names, however: Tel is an old word for “works at” or “works with,”
forar once meant traveler or peddler, helder was a guard or warrior on patrol, turnskull was a
digger, and turnstone a miller. All are used as last names among, primarily among Chondathans and
Illuskans.
   The names given here are by language, since areas sharing a common tongue tend to use the same
names.
   Aglarondan: Male: Aelthas, Courynn, Folcoerr, Gaedynn, Mourgram, Sealmyd, Yuiredd. Female:
Blaera, Courynna, Lyn- neth, Maera, Mourna, Wydda. Surnames: Aengrilor, Dulsaer, Gel- ebraes,
Jacerryl, Telstaerr, Uthelienn.
  Alzhedo: Male: Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid, Khemed, Mehmen, Sudeiman, Zasheir. Female: Atala, Ceidil,
Hama, Jasmal, Meilil, Seipora, Yasheira, Zasheida. Surnames: Basha, Dumein, Jassan, Khalid, Mostana,
Pashar, Rein.
   Chessentan: Male: Aeron, Daelric, Eurid, Nicos, Oriseus, Pharaxes, Thersos, Xandos. Female:
Ariadne, Cylla, Eriale, Halonya, Idriane, Mera, Numestra, Sinylla. Surnames: Aporos, Corynian,
Heldeion, Morieth, Nathos, Sphaerideion, Zora.
   Chondathan: Male: Darvin, Dorn, Evendur, Gorstag, Grim, Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal, Stedd.
Female: Arveene, Esvele, Jhessail, Kerri, Lureene, Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele. Sur- names:
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood, Greycas- tle, Tallstag.
   Chultan: Male: Atuar, Kwalu, Losi, Mezoar, Nsi, Osaw, Selu, Weshtek. Female: Azuil, Chuil, Fipya,
Isi, Lorit, Mainu, Sana, Tefnek. Surnames: None.
   Damaran: Male: Bor, Fodel, Glar, Grigor, Igan, Ivor, Kosef, Mival, Orel, Pavel, Sergor. Female:
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana, Zora. Surnames: Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov,
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag.
   Dambrathan: Male: Aethelmed, Houn, Rhivaun, Umbril, Waervyn, Xaemar, Zeltaebar. Female:
Chourm, Glouris, Maeve, Hayaera, Sevaera, Xaemarra, Zraela. Surnames: Calaumystar, Lharaendo,
Mristar, Talaudrym, Wyndael
  Durpari: Male: Charva, Duma, Hukir, Jama, Kilimut, Oskut, Pradir, Rajaput, Sikhil. Female: Apret,
Bask, Erilet, Fanul, Hist, Mokat, Nismet, Ril, Tiket. Surnames: Beszrizma, Datharathi, Melpurvatta,
Nalambar, Saqarastar, Tiliputakas.
  Dwarven: Male: Barundar, Dorn, Joyin, Khondar, Roryn, Storn, Thorik, Wulgar. Female: Belmara,
Dorna, Joylin, Kiira, Sambril, Tace, Umil. Surnames: Bladebite, Crownshield, Gor- drivver, Horn,
Skulldark, Stoneshield.
  Elven: Male: Aravilar, Faelar, Mourn, Nym, Orlpar, Saevel, Respen, Rhistel, Taeghen. Female: Amra,
Hacathra, Imizael, Jastra, Jhaumrithe, Quamara, Talindra, Vestele. Surnames: Amalith, Braegen,
Calaudra, Eveningfall, Laelithar, Moondown, Tarnruth.
  Elven (Drow): Male: Alak, Drizzt, Ilmryn, Merinid, Pharaun, Rizzen, Tebryn, Zaknafein. Female:
Akordia, Chalithra, Eclavdra, Jhaelrnya, Nedylene, Qilué , SiNafay, Vlondril. Surnames: Abaeir,
Coloara, Glannath, Illistyn, Pharn, Seerear, Vrinn, Xiltyn.
  Gnome: Male: Burgell, Colmarr, Dorgan, Falrinn, Halbrinn, Orlamm, Rondell, Stolig. Female:
Calanddra, Eriss, Iviss, Jaree, Lissa, Meree, Nathee, Zelazadda. Surnames: Blackrock, Blimth,
Greatorm, Rivenstone, Tavartarr, Uvarkk, Whitehorn.
  Halfling: Male: Blazanar, Corkaury, Dalabrac, Halandar, Ombert, Roberc, Thiraury, Wilimac.
Female: Aloniira, Calathra, Deldiira, Melinden, Olpara, Rosinden, Tara, Weninda. Surnames: Aumble,
Bramblefoot, Dardragon, Hardingdale, Merrymar, Starnhap.
  Halruaan: Male: Aldym, Chand, Hostegym, Meleghost, Presmer, Sandrue, Tethost, Uregaunt.
Female: Aithe, Alaethe, Chalan, Oloma, Phaele, Sarade, Vosthyl. Surnames: Avhoste, Darants,
Gedreghost, Maurmeril, Stamaraster, Zorastryl.
  Lantanese: Male: Eberc, Fodoric, Koger, Lambrac, Midoc, Norbert, Samber, Tibidoc. Female:
Avilda, Bersace, Charissa, Mel- sany, Phaerilda, Ravace, Umbrasy. Surnames: Angalstrand, Decirc,
Lamstrand, SeKorc, SeLangstra, SeMilderic.
  Illuskan: Male: Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath, Geth, Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth. Female:
Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga, Silifrey, Westra. Surnames: Brightwood, Helder,
Hornraven, Lackman, Stonar, Stormwind, Windrivver.
  Midani: Male: Ajaman, Alif, Assam, Bhadla, Dahalzel, Dawasir, Didaji, Farim, Haushi, Kabina,
Kadumi, Musalim, Nata, Rahid, Rashad, Sa’ar, Sabkhat, Utaiba, Yatagan, Zarud. Female: Abal, Aglavia,
Alethra, Bujauna, Dajala, Dizsa, Duthrala, Fiiriia, Ilyouma, Kalastiira, Lajarama, Nathla, Qoha’dar,
Rahalat, Ruha, Saalariira, Shalira, Tuibaila, Vayess, Yamala. Surnames: Surnames are not used.
Instead a Midani appellation is used or a matronymic or patronymic: “abd” (slave of), “al” (the),
“bint” (daughter of), “ibn” or “bin” (son of), the suffix “i” added to a location and preceded by “al”
(Rashad Al-Karji would translate into “the Rashad from Karj.”)
  Mulhorandi: Male: Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki, Kethoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De, Urhur.
Female: Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara, Murithi, Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis. Surnames: Ankhalab,
Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem, Sepret, Uuthrakt.
  Orc: Male: Besk, Durth, Fang, Gothog, Harl, Kesk, Orrusk, Tharag, Thog, Ugurth. Female: Betharra,
Creske, Edarreske, Duvaega, Neske, Orvaega, Varra, Yeskarra. Surnames: Dummik, Horthor, Lammar,
Sormuzhik, Turnskull, Ulkrunnar, Zorgar.
  Rashemi: Male: Borivik, Faurgar, Jandar, Kanithar, Madis- lak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak.
Female: Fyevarra, Hulmar- ra, Immith, Imzel, Navarra, Shevarra, Tammith, Yuldra. Surnames:
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara, Stayanoga, Ulmokina.
  Shaaran: Male: Awar, Cohis, Damota, Gewar, Hapaw, Laskaw, Moktar, Senesaw, Tokhis. Female:
Anet, Bes, Dahvet, Faqem, Idim, Lenet, Moqem, Neghet, Sihvet. Surnames: Cor Marak, Hiaw Harr,
Laumee Harr, Moq Qo Harr, Taw Harr, Woraw Tarak.
  Tashalan: Male: Angwe, Dumai, Gharbei, Indo, Masambe, Morife, Ngongwe, Sepoto. Female:
Ayesha, Bhula, Lashela, Intin- gi, Mashai, Shevaya, Shesara, Ushula. Surnames: Damarthe, Ghomposo,
Ishivin, Jalamba, Konge, Maingwe, Wasatho.
  Turmic: Male: Anton, Diero, Marcon, Pieron, Rimardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero. Female: Balama,
Dona, Faila, Jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise, Vonda. Surnames: Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine,
Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo.
  Uluik: Male: Aklar, Hilur, Liruk, Namiir, Selmik, Uknar, Tirmuk, Wariik. Female: Chamuk, Iirkik,
Kagiik, Lelchik, Nirval, Talchuk, Valiir, Wenvik. Surnames: None.
  Untheric: Male: Azzedar, Chadrezzan, Gibbur, Horat, Kassur, Numer, Samar, Ungred. Female:
Chadra, Ilzza, Jezzara, Marune, Saldashune, Xuthra, Zeldara. Surnames: Seldom used, patronymics
preferred.

Fantasy Arabia and Arabic
The Forgotten Realms has three distinct areas that act as fantastical Arabian settings: Anauroch, Calimshan, and
Zakhara. Anauroch is a sandy land of desert nomads. Calimshan is a vast land of distinct city-states that has
elements of the Ottoman Turks as well as fantasy Arabia. Zakhara is a continent’s worth of Arabian Nights fantasy.
  Both the people of Anauroch and Zakhara speak Midani, a language that is virtually identical to Arabic. They do
not use surnames; they use follow-on descriptions to clarify differences between people with the same name. Thus
they have names that include Arabic-like structures such as “bint” (daughter of), “ibn” (“son of”), and “al” (the).
Bayzed Ibn Kull Al-Fallah would therefor mean “Bayzed, son of Kull the Fortunate.”
  Calishites speak Alzhedo. This is a language related to Auran, the tongue of djinn and other creatures of
elemental air that blends elements of Arabic, Turkish, and fantasy. It does not use Arabic structures. People have
surnames.


Fantasy Asia and Asian Languages
The Forgotten Realms has multiple fantasy versions of various locations and cultures in Asia at various points in
world history. There are two places like China, two like Japan, two like Korea. There’s a Tibet, an India, and more.
  When drawing from a real-world Asian culture, be sure you’re ascribing the right cultural and language trappings
to the right place. T’u Lung does not produce samurai. A person from Koryo would not have a Japanese name.

Location Adjectives
The adjective used for the citizens (and products) of various locations often has a unique
formulation as described below.
 Aglarond                 Aglarondan                           Cormanthor                Cormanthorian
 Amn                      Amnian                               Cormanthyr                Cormanthyran
 Anauroch                 Anaurian                             Cormyr                    Cormyrean
 Arabel                   Arabellan                            Daerlun                   Daerlunian
 Archendale               Arkhen                               The Dalelands             Dalesman/Dalesmen
 Arrabar                  Arrabarran                                                     (male), Dalesfolk (male or
 Aryvandaar               Aryvandaaran                                                   female)
 Athkatla                 Athkatlan                            Damara                    Damaran
 Baldur’s Gate            Baldurian                            Dwarf                     Dwarvish (the language),
 Berdusk                  Berduskan                                                      Dwarven (stuff)
 Calaunt                  Calauntan                            Elf                       Elvish (the language),
 Calimshan                Calishite                                                      Elven (stuff)
 Carradoon                Carradden                            Elturel                   Elturian
 Ched Nasad               Ched Nasadan                         Elversult                 Elversian
 Chondath                 Chondathan                           Eryndlyn                  Eryndlyrr
 Chult                    Chultan                              Eveningstar               Evenor
 Citadel Adbar            Adbarrim                             Evermeet                  Evermeetian
 Citadel Felbarr          Felbarran                            Faerûn                    Faerûnian
 Citadel of the Raven     Ravenar                              Hillsfar                  Hillsfarian
 Hulburg                   Hulburgan                             Saerloon                   Searloonian
 Imaskar                   Imaskaran (stuff),                    Scornubel                  Scornubian
                           Imaskari (people)                     Selgaunt                   Selgite (stuff), Selgauntan
 Immersea                  Immersean                                                        (people)
 Impiltur                  Impilturian                           Sembia                     Sembian
 Innarlith                 Innarlan                              Shaar                      Shaaran (stuff and
 Iriaebor                  Iriaeben                                                         language), Shaaryan
 Kozakura                  Kozakuran                                                        (tribes and people)
 Lantan                    Lantanna                              Shade Enclave              Shadovar
 Lorosfyr                  Lorosfyran                            Shadowdale                 Grimmar (people),
 Luskan                    Luskar                                                           Grimmen (stuff)
 Marsember                 Marsembian                            Shou Lung                  Shou
 Maztica                   Maztican                              Sildéyuir                  Sildéyuiren
 Melvaunt                  Melvauntian                           Sossal                     Sossar (stuff), Sossrim
 Menzoberranzan            Menzoberranyr                                                    (people)
 Mintarn                   Tarnian                               Sundabar                   Sundabarian
 Mirabar                   Mirabarran                            Suzail                     Suzailan
 Mulhorand                 Mulhorandi                            Tantras                    Tantran
 Mulmaster                 Mulman (stuff),                       Tashluta                   Tashlutar
                           Mulmasterite (people)                 Tethyr                     Tethyrian
 Myth Drannor              Myth Drannan                          Thay                       Thayan T
 Narfell                   Nar                                   hesk                       Theskian
 Nesmé                     Nesmian                               Tilverton                  Tilverian
 Neverwinter               Neveren (stuff),                      Turmish                    Turmishan
                           Neverwintan (people)                  Unther                     Untherite
 Nimbral                   Nimbrian (stuff), Nimbran             Urmlaspyr                  Urmlassan
                           (people)                              Vaasa                      Vaasan
 Ordulin                   Ordulan (stuff), Ordulian             Waterdeep                  Waterdhavian
                           (people)                              Yhaunn                     Yhauntan
 Palishchuck               Palishchukian(s)                      Yûlash                     Yûlashi
 Phlan                     Phlanite                              Zhentil Keep               Zhent (people), Zhentish
 Procampur                 Procampan                                                        (stuff)
 Proskur                   Proskurian                            Zentarim                   Zhentarian (stuff),
 Rashemen                  Rashemi                                                          Zhentilar (people;
 Raumathar                 Raumatharii                                                      soldiers)
 Ruathym                   Ruathan

Help us add to this list! If you find a reference to place nomenclature in any of the source material, or find yourself
making one up, please let us know.


Coin
Barter and coinage of all sorts are common in the Realms, and most countries and city-states mint
their own money. Thus coins from different places have different shapes and decoration. For most
purposes, a coin is worth the same regardless of its point of origin.
  Note that people don’t use the word “money” in the Frogotten Realms. They saiy “coin” instead.
  Coinage throughout the realms is customarily valued as follows:
  10 copper pieces = 1 silver piece
  10 silver pieces = 1 gold piece
  10 gold pieces = 1 platinum piece
  Some places have minted electrum coins but they are uncommon (like encountering dollar coins
in the U.S.).
  2 electrum pieces = 1 gold piece

Coinage in Cormyr
The favored manner of currency in Cormyr is the royal coinage of the Court, stamped with a dragon on one side,
and a treasury date mark on the other (the penalty for counterfeiting in Cormyr, and most other similar nations, is
death). There is no paper currency save for I.O.U.s which are known as “blood-notes,” as they must be signed in
blood by both (or all, if more than two) parties involved, and taken to the local Lord for the affixing of the royal
seal.
  In Cormyr, coinage terminology is as follows:
  copper pieces = copper thumbs
  silver pieces = silver falcons
  electrum pieces = blue eyes
  gold pieces = golden lions
  platinum pieces = tricrown

Other Currency
Many nations and people use forms of money unique to their locality. Often these forms of money
have less real value in gold than they represent (just as the value of the paper in a dollar is not
great). They are typically backed by a local government or accepted as valuable by local custom,
and often they have no value outside their localities.
   Bela. A word for paper money that refers both to bills used in the lands of Kara-Tur and more
recent script issued by the over-chief or khan of the tribes of the Horde. In the western Realms, it is
worthless, and occasionally offered as an insult.
   Blood Notes. Scrolls, letters, or other carvings representing IOUs and promissory notes from the
listed person to the holder of the note. Blood notes can be made by individuals, companies, or
countries and cities to cover debts, and should the debtor still be around, they are legally obligated
to pay when it is presented. Blood notes from individuals who are no longer alive are not binding.
   Trade Bar, Mirabar. Coming from the wild country north of Waterdeep, these trade bars are
made of black iron and shaped like rectangular spindels. They are worth 10 gp in Mirabar itself, 5
gp in the rest of the Realms.
   Trade Bar, Merchant’s. A thin, silver bar worth either 10, 20, or 50 gp each. The bar is marked at
one end with its value, at the other with the symbol of the trading institution or caster which
created it. Broken trade bars are valueless, though most merchants will continue to honor the trade
bars of defunct institutions.
   The trade bars of the Iron Throne trading group are not honored by other trading organizations,
as this group is considered disreputable. Merchants’ trade bars can be manufactured anywhere, but
an increasing number of them bear the mint mark of Baldur’s Gate.
   Trade Bar, Sembian. Ingot-shaped bars of silver dotted with copper and marked with the
symbol of Sembia, these trade bars are considered face value and backed up by the money of the
Merchant Kingdom. They are most often made in 10, 25, and 50 gp values.
   Trade Bar, Lantan. A flat, envelope-shaped bar of worked steel marked with the great wheel of
Gond, such bars are worth 20 gp each and are used primarily along the Sword Coast and in other
regions where the Lantanese normally trade.
   Toal, Waterdeep. A square brass coin with a hole bored in the center, commonly used in the City
of Splendors. In Waterdeep, it has a value similar to one electrum piece, but is considered nearly
worthless in places distant from the city.
   Harbor Moon, Waterdeep. A special Waterdhavian coin in the shape of a cresent, made of
platinum and inset with electrum. It is used in bulk purchases in Waterdeep, where it is worth 50
gp each. In lands distant from Waterdeep, its value drops to 2 gp per harbor moon.
  Steelpense, Sembian. A coin introduced by the Sembian government to replace silver (which the
government could then horde) the coin was overproduced and dropped in value until its present
value is 1 steelpense = 1 copper piece. The Sembian nobles have disavowed the coin’s value, but still
honor it grudgingly throughout the country.
  Shou Lung Trade Bars. A slender bar of silver, definitely Kara-Turran in origin, which has made
its way to the West with the occasional trader. Shou Lung trade bars are worth about 40 gp each.
  Tharsult Statues. Far to the south, the nation of Tharsult uses small art objects in trade. These
statues of ivory, jade, and serpentine are used as coinage in that region, and have reached the
heartlands of the Realms as curios. Typical statues are worth 15 gp each in the North, but only 5 gp
each in their native land.
  Shaar Rings. The plainsmen of the Shaar use rings made of sliced and bored ivory, hung on long
strings. Rings will be found in bundles, and each ring will be worth 3 gp each.
  Gond Bells. An odd form of money introduced by the Lantanese and used in areas of the North, in
particular in trade between worshippers of Gond. The small Gond bells are made of brass and
almost totally enclose a loose ornamental stone which causes it to clatter. Gond bells are worth 10
gp on the open market, 20 gp if traded to a church of Gond.

Adamantite and Mithral
There are two special metals in the Forgotten Realms.
  Adamantite. If you want a super hard metal, use adamantite. Adamantite is a jet-black alloy of
Adamant and other metals. Usually black in color, adamantite will have a green sheen when viewed
by candlelight or a purple-white sheen when viewed by magical light. Adamantite is incredibly
strong and hard. Weapons made from it can cut through weaker metals. Armor made from it is nigh
impenetrable.
  Mithral. If you want a super light metal, use mithral. Mithral is a silvery-white metal. Items made
out of mithral weight half as much as similar items made of steel. Pieces of armor made mostly out
of mithral are very light, therefore they allow the wearer to make better use of their natural agility
and are less restrictive on the spellcasting.

Gems of the Realms
Faerûn has all the ornamental stones and precious and semi-precious gems you’d find on Earth
with the addition of the following special types.
   Rogue Stone. Rogue stone is a small magical gemstone whose rainbow colors shift as if in liquid,
slowly swirling iridescently, when exposed to sunlight. They are extremely rare and repel each
other like magnets.
   King’s Tears. King's Tears are sometimes called frozen tears, or lich weepings. They are
transparent teardrop-shaped stones with a smooth surface and are seemingly unbreakable by
physical force. Folklore suggests these stones are the crystallized tears of long-dead necromancer
kings. In each jewel can be seen that which the weeping king loved ages ago.
   Beljuril. Beljuril is a deep seawater green and all known specimens are roughly the size of a
human fist and not quite spherical. About once every hour (rates vary from stone to stone) a beljuril
will absorb an undetectable amount of energy from within a thirty foot radius and re-emit that
energy as a flash of sparkling light without heat, sound, or electrical discharge. The light produced is
easily noticeable when the ambient light is dim (candlelight or lantern light) and in the dark it is
dazzling to the eye. Beljurils are very difficult to cut with metal tools and the stone is very durable.
They are sometimes claw-mounted to shoulder-plates or worn in a pectoral, or used as decorative
lighting or beacons by the wealthy.
  Amartha. Amaratha is also known as shieldstone. Found as small lumps or nodules in deep rock
strata, amaratha is soft and yields greenish white to pale green gemstones that can be set into body
jewelry or any setting where it is protected from damage or wear. Shieldstone attracts and absorbs
electricity in a ten foot radius, protecting all within this area until it vaporizes. A large quantity of
amaratha could absorb a natural or magical lightning bolt.
  Jasmal. Jasmal is a durable, very hard gemstone found in the form of small veins or (very rarely)
larger seam deposits in the Thunder Peaks and the Spine of the World. It is so hard that it can hold a
cutting edge and can even be worked into small nonmetallic weapons. When polished, jasmals catch
sunlight or torchlight and, although themselves remaining transparent and colorless, give off halos
of amber light.
  Bloodstone. Bloodstones in the Realms come from the Vaasa/Damara area, and are the chief
export of this region, hence their being known as the Bloodstone Lands.
  Laeral's Tears. The Realms name for beryllonite. Named after the sorceress Laeral Silverhand.
  Star Metal. The name in the Realms for a meteorite; forged with common metals to make durable
weapons of great strength.

Celestial Bodies
The Sun is called the Sun. The Moon is called Selûne and the Moon. The night sky is known as the
Sea of Night and instead of one Milky Way, there are several “rivers of stars.” The aurora borealis is
called Selune's Veil or the Tearfall Veil (a reference to Selune's Tears).

Selûne and Selûne’s Tears
Toril’s moon is known as Selûne. While Selûne in the sky appears no larger than a human hand held
at arm’s length, it is a world in its own right, easily two thousand miles across. Selûne is bright
enough to cast pale shadows when full. It is accompanied in the sky by the Tears of Selûne, a
number of smaller luminaries that spread across the sky in a great arc trailing the moon.
   Selûne is of course associated with the goddess of the moon, Selûne, worshipped as a goddess of
light, stars, and navigation. Whether the moon is named for her or vice versa is unknown. She is
thought by some to reside in the moon or that the moon itself is the goddess.
   Eclipses. Selûne’s orbit around Toril is almost in the same plane as Toril’s orbit around its sun, so
solar and lunar eclipses are frequent. Solar eclipses are never annular (the sun’s edge cannot be
seen during totality) and almost never partial, because Selûne’s shadow on Toril and Toril’s shadow
on Selûne are quite large. Eclipses are thus spectacular but rather commonplace. Inhabitants of any
particular land do not always notice such eclipses, since the rising and setting times for Selûne
wander across the calendar. Solar eclipses might briefly cause nocturnal beings to awaken, but they
quickly return to sleep once daylight returns.
   Selûne’s Phases. Selûne is full at exactly midnight, the first of Hammer, 1372 DR, and every thirty
days, ten hours, and thirty minutes thereafter. The time between successive full moons is,
technically speaking, one synodic month, the time from one Sun–Toril–Selûne conjunction to the
next. Selûne makes exactly forty-eight synodic revolutions every four calendar years on Toril. Thus,
Selûne is full at exactly midnight on the first day of every leap year, and has the same phase on any
calendar day four years forward or backward in time.
   One Faerûnian holiday, the Feast of the Moon, is held during a full moon that obligingly shows up
on or about that day. Because Selûne’s synodic period is so close to the actual length of the calendar
month, Selûne is full around the first day of each month or on festival days, give or take a day or so.
The annual festival days serve to correct discrepancies between the synodic and calendar months,
with Shieldmeet providing a necessary correction every fourth year to keep the full moon from
sliding deep into each month.
  Tears of Selûne. The Tears of Selûne are a collection of hundreds of very small but bright
celestial bodies (asteroids) that orbit Toril in Selûne’s wake. The Tears act like any such bodies in a
Trojan point, meaning that they do not stay in place but actually orbit around a common center in
whirlpool fashion. The Tears are visible as points of light like stars, too small for viewers to discern
their actual shapes.
  The individual orbits of the Tears are not exactly coplanar with the orbit of Toril and Selûne, but
they are close. As a result, their appearance in the night sky of Toril is that of a flattened ellipse of
bright “stars,” trailing Selûne by sixty degrees across the sky, along the ecliptic. Typically, an
average human can cover Selûne’s image with his clenched fist at arm’s length; the Tears, however,
appear to span an area of the night sky almost three handspans wide and about three fingers deep
at arm’s length. The relative positions of individual Tears change from night to night as they orbit
their common center.
  The Tears are not bright enough to be seen during the day, though Selûne often is. Though the
Tears are bright even when Selûne is new, they are not always visible in the night sky, since they
too have rising and setting times, and thus might not be up at night. The first Tear rises or sets
about four hours after Selûne does. Because it is so long, the full set of Tears takes about three
hours to rise or set, from first Tear to last. The combined effect of the Tears is not enough to cast
shadows at night.

Important Stars
For centuries, astrologers have observed the appearance of one or two particularly bright stars
close to sunrise and right after sunset. Anadia and Coliar are sometimes known as the Dawn
Heralds, although they might just as easily be called the Evening Heralds too.
  Deeper in the Sea of Night roam the Five Wanderers, inconstant stars that do not follow a yearly
path across the sky as the other stars do. These Wanderers are markedly different from the star-
rivers through which they roam; they tend to be larger, brighter, and show wondrous colors.
Karpri, the nearest, is a sapphire orb with great whitecaps at top and bottom. Chandos, the next, is
a brown-green smudge whose markings change oddly over a few nights’ watching. Glyth is a dull
gray, but surrounded by a spectacular ring and three lesser bodies, visible only with magical aid.
Garden is a tiny green sparkle, rarely seen. The last, H’Catha is a gleam of diamond white.
  The King-Killer Star is a red star (a comet) that provokes dragons to rage when it appears in the
sky due to ancient elven magic.
  Color Spray is a pinkish star visible primarily during the spring and early summer. When seen
with the naked eye, but a telescope allows one to see it as a rainbow triangle, hence it being named
after the spell. Similarly, the Galleon is a bluish star that under magnification looks something like
ship. It is visible during the autumn and early winter and thus is called by many Auril’s Ship.


Constellations
There are a number of constellations of note in the northern hemisphere. Their names differ by
culture. The constellations’ most common names are given below. Not all of the constellations are
visible all year round. Note that the constellations visible from the southern hemisphere are, of
course, different.
  Mystra’s Star Circle (all year). North is marked by an awesome circle of large, bright stars with
utter darkness between them, which is known to most folk today as Mystra’s Star Circle (her
floating Castle of Night, in childrens’ fairytales, is said to float in the center of the darkness). Due
north is marked by the brightest “Brow Star,” called Alagairtha by the Bedine, after a proud Bedine
sorceress who is said to have challenged the gods long, long ago, and been imprisoned in the
heavens as a punishment: to preserve her breathtaking beauty, but keep her forever from men).
Other folk in the Realms call this constellation the Crown of the North, or just the “Cold Crown.”
   People born under these stars (those who fall in the gaps between the other contellations) are
said to be inquisitive, with a strong ability to learn. Those who pursue the academics, arts, and
magic are said to be linked to these stars.
   Auroth (Winter). Down low, running horizontal close to the horizon, is a zigzag line of seventeen
stars that join two larger, brighter star clusters, the Head or Jaws (to the west) and the Tailknot or
Knotted Tail (to the east). This is Auroth, the Ice Snake of Auril, or “Old Icefangs,” also called White
Dragon by the elves. Said to be a beloved and faithful steed of the goddess who sacrificed himself to
shield Auril in a long-ago battle among the gods. From particular twinkling stars of Auroth’s body
come Auril’s messages, to clergy of Auril who pray to those specific stars.
   People born under these stars are said to have a cold, calm demeanor, but are capable in erupting
in a fierce anger. Some wizards and people who live a mercenary life find themselves linked to
these stars.
   Elfmaid’s Tears (Winter). The Elfmaid’s tears are visible near Mystra’s Star Circle in the
northern hemisphere but are considered a winter constellation when they are “up.” Formed of two
vertical lines of blue-white stars, of unequal length, they are said to be the tears of Sehanine
Moonbow, wept when Lolth and the drow turned upon the rest of elfkind.
   People born under these stars are said to be sensitive souls who must build up walls around their
hearts or remain open to many emotional wounds.
   The Frostqueen’s Throne (Winter). In the depths of winter in the North the Frostqueen’s
Throne (also called the Seat of Winter or simply Auril Frostqueen) rises. This constellation of bright
white stars presents the profile of a chair. Although holy to those devoted to Auril, they dare not
beseech Auril herself so long as Auroth remains in the sky to answer their prayers. People in more
southerly lands see the shape not as a chair but as a profile of a crown and know it instead as the
King’s Crown, with legends ascribing it to various rulers with heroic or tragic stories.
   People born under this star are thought to be intelligent and incisive but distant and absorbed by
their own thoughts most of the time.
   Jassa’s Dagger (Winter). Jassa’s Dagger (said to have been hurled into the heavens by the dying
Queen Jassa of the city of Lirremar, long ago, after she was impaled on a spear at the Battle of Biting
Serpents) is a dagger-shaped constellation: a line of six stars whose highest star (the Pommel) is
large and pink, and that is crossed two stars lower by a cross-line of four fainter stars (the Guards).
It hangs in the sky below and east of the Sleepless Knights, hilt uppermost and blade forming a
diagonal line pointing southwest, down and away from the Watchful Knights.
   People born under these stars are said to have pride, whether it be in their positions, possessions,
or accomplishments. They are also known to hold a grudge. Ambitious people and those who set
out on personal vendettas can be linked to these stars.
   Sleepless Knights (Spring). Not far south of Mystra’s Star Circle, there’s a distinctive cluster of
middling-brightness stars arranged just like the five pips on the “5” side of a d6. These are the
Sleepless Knights, also known as the Watchful Knights. They are thought to be five knights
oathbound to keep watch on the landscape of the North for approaching armies of foes, on behalf of
a long-dead king. It’s said they “rode into the sky” (off a cliff on a perilous mountain trail, in a
blinding, late-season blizzard) but somehow never fell.
   People born under these stars are said to be extremely reliable and loyal to their friends and duty.
Some knights and paladins can find themselves linked to these stars.
   The Arrows of the Gods (Spring). The Arrows of the Gods are formed of three converging lines
of stars, each with a cluster of stars at its outward end, or “point.” Where the three lines come
together points east. To folk elsewhere in the Realms, these stars are called the Atar's Arrows, the
Sun’s Signpost, or the Caltrop.
  People who are born under these stars are said to have a very blunt personality for better or
worse. They tend to be driven and tackle their goals and obstacles as directly as possible.
Independent and headstrong people tend to be linked to these stars.
  Lavarandar’s Lantern (Spring). Lavarandar’s Lantern (also known as “the Lamp”) is an upright
rectangle of stars enclosing four very bright blue-white stars, in the northern sky far south of
Mystra’s Star Circle and West of the Watchful Knights. Along the Sword Coast, they are thought to
be four sisters, who were regretfully imprisoned by the king their father when they became
lycanthropes. Later, an evil nephew plunged the cage into the sea to drown them, and so inherit the
crown, but this enraged Umberlee, and the goddess hurled the cage up out of the watery depths, but
too far, so it soared up into the Sea of Night and stayed there, as it does to this day.
  People born under these stars are said to be compassionate of others, but keep a stalwart
demeanor when facing their own problems. Some clerics and people who put others ahead of
themselves can be linked to these stars.
  The Scimitar (Summer). Roughly opposite in the sky from Auroth, the Scimitar is a bright starry
cluster followed by a curving tail of stars. The scimitar cuts its way across the sky throughout
summer. It is said by many in the North to be the sword fallen from Amaunator’s Belt, a
constellation to the north and later in the season.
  To the Bedine, this is the Serpent of the Sands, Urwath, “The Swallower.” The desert nomads
believe that this creature is wild and amoral, older than the gods, and that it swallows mountains,
trees, and grasses to create the desert, leaving only sand in its wake. Its presence in the southern
sky, most Bedine believe, means that the desert will continually expand southward, as it eats its
way across the world. In Tunland, Cormyr, Iriaebor, and Westgate, however, it is recognized
respectively as Faeraula, the Sword of the South, the Southfires, and the “Dangers of the Desert.”
  People born under this star are thought to be ruled by their passions, particularly lust and anger.
  Amaunator’s Belt (Summer). This line of six yellow-white stars appears high in the sky in the
far north during summer. When Amaunator was thought dead, it was said to be the sword belt he
failed to buckle in his haste to go to the battle in which he died.
  People born under these stars are said to be brave but rash.
  Eyes of the Watching Woman (Summer). The Eyes are two “fuzzy” clusters of blue-white stars,
which appear as two side-by-side crescents or arcs in the sky, points downward. To most, these are
Eyes of the Watching Woman, while to the Bedine they are the Two Jambiyas.
  People born under these stars are said to be highly sociable and the most adaptable to change.
Those who have a very charismatic aura about them and people who survive great events are said
to be linked to these stars.
  The Unicorn (Autumn). This constellation marks the end of summer. It is made of a number of
bright stars and thought to make a horse head with a point for the tip of a unicorn’s horn. It has
many different names. The elves call it Correlian and think of it as Correlon Larethian’s mount.
Many humans of the North call it Mielikki and see it as a symbol of that goddess. Others name it
Eachthighern, the mysterious lord of unicorns and pegasi.
  Folk born under this constellation are said to possess quiet strength and to be good at sensing
people’s emotions and changes in the weather.
  The Gate (Autumn). Called Esetar by the elves, this constellation is thought by many to be the
celestial gate from which Dendar, the Night Serpent, with someday emerge to devour the world.
The people of Chult believe Dendar will emerge from beneath mountain in their jungle land and
they instead call it the Cage and think of it as a prison in which the gods hurl the most evil souls. It
appears as a rectangle formed from lines of dim stars.
  People born under this constellation are thought to be patient, deep thinkers who are able to have
prescient dreams.
  Shard of Selûne (Autumn). This diamond-shaped constellation of many stars is highest toward
autumn’s end. It’s thought to be a part of Selûne cut from her in the ancient battle between Selûne
and her divine sister, Shar. The wound was so great it made a bright scar upon Shar as well. Some
say it was this wound that made the Tears of Selûne.
  People born when this constellation is high are said to be mercurial and have conflicting and
conflicted natures. It’s considered an ominous omen when twins are born under these stars
because it is thought that the siblings will become bitter rivals.

Forgotten Realms Terms
Banned Words                                               barrow gold
                                                           barrow spirit
a.m.
                                                           batrachi
coffee (should be “kaeth” or “kaethae”)
                                                           battle-mistress
money (should be “coin”)
                                                           battlerager
restaurant (should be “feasting hall,” or more
                                                           beast-men: ogres (formerly used only by humans,
formally as “skaethar”)
                                                           now by gnomes and halflings, too)
week (should be “tenday”)
                                                           belbolt (coin)
high elf (refer to the Forgotten Realms subraces)
                                                           beljuril (gemstone)
hill dwarf (should be “shield dwarf”)
                                                           Binding, the
hourglass (should be “sandglass”)
                                                           birdpipe (a set of pan pipes)
mountain dwarf (should be “gold dwarf”)
                                                           blacklung fever (disease)
o’clock (should be “bells” but most people don’t
                                                           blackroot (poison)
reference time so specifically)
                                                           blacktongue (disease)
p.m.
                                                           bladedance
aba (a loose, long shirt or tunic, which often has long    bloodbeak (bird)
sleeves; worn by the Bedine)                               bloodfly (pl. bloodflies)
Abeir                                                      bloodpurge (medicine)
Abeir-Toril                                                bloodstaunch (medicine)
Abyss, the                                                 bloodwood (tree)
Academy, the (in Menzoberranzan)                           blueleaf (a drug; also a tree)
aearee                                                     brainworm
afterdaze                                                  Bregan D’aerthe
Aillesel Seldarie. (“Sledarine preserve us.” In Elvish.)   broodmate
alaé (Elvish greeting)                                     brittle bones: humans (used only by orcs)
alu Tel’Quessir (“water elf” in Elvish)                    broken bones: wounded, defeated, slaves or those
alu’dala (“water battle” in Elvish)                        too weak to defend themselves or to be worthy of
ar Tel’Quessir (“gold or sun elf” in Elvish)               attention. (Used of all races, including their own, but
arael (“heart” in Elvish)                                  only by orcs)
arael’lia (“heart oak” in Elvish)                          burlbush(es) (flower)
arael’sha (“heart friend” in Elvish)                       Castellan’s Guard (Zhentil Keep)
arael’vae (“heart son” in Elvish)                          cavefly (pl. caveflies)
Araumycos                                                  Change, the
archdevil                                                  changelands (a piece of terrain that clearly doesn't
arms-captain                                               fit in with the surrounding terrain, and therefore was
arms-major                                                 likely caused by the Spellplague way back when)
arselu’tel’quess (“high magic” in Elvish)                  Chosen, the
Art, the (magic, spellcasting)                             circle, the (of high mages)
Astral Sea, the                                            clearstone
audience chamber (pref. over throne room)                  cloudwrack
authokh (coin)                                             coin (not money)
bae’qeshel telphraezzar (aka the bae’qeshel, or the        coronal
Whisperers of the Dark. Drow bards.)                       Corpsehaven
baneblade                                                  crysstone
culler                                                  Fair Folk, the: elves
dala (“battle” in Elvish)                               fairlady
daggerhedge (bush)                                      Fane of Shadow (temple on Shade Enclave)
dark bolt                                               Far Realm, the
Dark Mother                                             featherlung (plague/disease)
darkblade (mercenary lacking principals)                featherwood (tree)
darkblossom (bush)                                      felsul (tree)
darkenbeast                                             felthane
darkhall                                                festhall (syn. Brothel and gambling place)
darkrot (disease)                                       fey gates
Darksong Knight                                         fey mounds
darkstone crystal(s)                                    fey sites
darksword                                               Feywild, the
dead-disk (phaerimm)                                    fingertalk (sign language of thieves, not drow, see
deadwall                                                also “handcant”)
Deep, the (or Shadow Deep, the)                         fire-blast (n.)
deepbear                                                First Hilt (leader of the bladesingers)
deepnight (midnight)                                    First-Speaker (leader of the Cult of the Dragon)
demon-boar                                              flakefungus
Disciples of Phelthong                                  fleshmason
Dome of the Stars, the (council chamber of              fleshwort (medicine)
Evermeet)                                               forestmote freefolk
downland (southern Cormyr)                              Free Folk, the: satyrs (a human term now used by all
dracophoenix                                            races, including satyrs)
dragon scales (protection spell)                        Fringe, the (aka Shadow Fringe, the)
dragon’s-teeth (game)                                   GatherStone (phaerimm term)
durthan (the evil wychlaran)                            Gauntlgrym
duskwood (tree)                                         gentlesir
dragonbone (made of the bones of a dragon)              ghazneth
dragonkind                                              Ghazneth Scourge
Dwarvish (the language)                                 glaur (a short, flared, and curved horn which
earth node (also “nodes”)                               resembles a cornucopia, and is fitted with valves
earthmote (not earthberg or earth-mote)                 [those without valves are known as gloons])
Eilistraeen (worshiper of Eilistraee)                   gloryhouse
Eldest (Evermeet)                                       glowball
el’tael (Elvish for a master of the bladesinging art,   glowstone
singular and plural)                                    godsforsaken (replaces Godforsaken)
Elemental Chaos,                                        gold (not money)
the elfkin                                              Goodman/Goodwoman (a title or form of address,
elflord                                                 usu. capped)
elf maid                                                goodsir (a form of address, not capped)
elfroad                                                 grand mage (title, Evermeet)
elfsong                                                 graycloth guildhouse
elven lodge                                             Gutbuster Brigade
Elvish (the language)                                   hamach (n.)
Ereilir Vor (Plains of Soulfire, Demonweb Pits)         Hamarfae
evenfeast (can replace “dinner”)                        hand drum (s double-headed drum)
eyehead (epithet for beholder) Faerie                   handcant (thieves’ sign language, see also
evermead (a mead crafted only in Evermeet)              “fingertalk”)
faerielight                                             Harper (member of organization)
Faerûn (continent, “everywhere in Faerûn”, not “on      Harpers, the (name of organization)
Faerûn.”)                                               hathran (one of the leaders of the sisterhood of the
Faerzress                                               wychlaran)
heartstop (use in place of “heart attack”)                 Master of Sorcere
Hells (also, the Nine Hells)                               Melting, the
hellsteed (aka nightmare)                                  menhirs
Hidden One’s Gift,                                         meat: all intelligent prey (used only by orcs)
the high loregem                                           middark
High Council,                                              mind mage
the high mage                                              Mighty, the: orcs (used only by orcs, to speak of their
high magic                                                 race)
highsun (noon)                                             mindwine (narcotic wine)
Hill Elder (Evermeet, Evereska)                            mintwater
hillmote                                                   misthead (mistleaf addict)
hiresword                                                  mistleaf (drug)
hin: halflings (informal but polite; everyday usage        morningfeast (in place of breakfast)
among halflings)                                           Most High, the
homeagain (greeting: “Glad homeagain, Joe.”)               murdath
honeyvine (flower)                                         myrmidar (ancient Netherese warrior)
House (i.e.: You are a member of a noble House.)           mythaalnirr darach (Elvish, spell of mythal-shaping)
House Unnamed                                              mythal
Hulorn (Lord Mayor of Selgaunt)                            mythalcraft
hurbryn: humans (a satyr and dryad term meaning            mythal force
“heavy-footed ones,” now used by halflings and             mythal-shaping
creeping into usage by other races)                        mythal stone
ildva (the bond between the wychlaran and the              mythal trap
vremyonni)                                                 mythal-weave
Infiernadex of Aesperus (book)                             mythallar (Netheril)
iqua Tel`Quessir                                           n Tel’Quessir (“not People” in Elvish, meaning a non-
lanceboard (chess-like game)                               elf)
kaer’vaelen (“First Hilt of the bladesingers” in Elvish)   Nine Hells
Khazid’hea (Cattie-brie’s former sword)                    Nightshadow
lady’s promise (flower)                                    Nightstar
laspar (tree)                                              noble fey, the
LastHome, the (aka Evereska)                               orc hold
Leaves of One Night, The (ancient religious text,          orcling (young or small orc)
Shar)                                                      orcspawn (syn. half-orc)
leShay                                                     orcswill (orc wine or beer, or a lie)
lia (“oak” in Elvish)                                      oroosh: humans (used by treants, this literally means
Lolth                                                      “never-stopping talkers”)
Lolthite (derogatory)                                      othlor (the elite among the hathran, othlor means
Long Watch, the (Evereska guard)                           “true one”)
longbarb (aged phaerimm)                                   pack lizard
longhorn (a Faerûn flute)                                  Palace Most High (on Shade Enclave)
loregem                                                    paleblood
lorestone                                                  paleblooded
mage rune                                                  peeptalk (language of birds)
marchion                                                   People, the: elves (used only by elves)
magecraft (noun)                                           phaerimm (pl.: phaerimm, not phaerimms)
magelight                                                  piwafwi
magelord                                                   plaguechanged (someone who has been changed by
magesight                                                  spellplague to a monstrous extent)
Manyhanded, the: humans (derived from “The                 plaguelands (lands that still hold pockets of
Manyhanded Curse,” an old elf insult about humans)         spellplague)
marsh fever (disease)                                      Plaguewrought Land, the (a particular place on the
Master of Melee-Magthere                                   map that is riddled with spellplague)
portal-stone                                          shadowstuff
post-tower                                            shadowtop (tree)
prairiemote                                           shadow-web
probiter                                              Shadow Weave
Proud Peoples, the: dwarves and elves, collectively   Shaeradim, the
(used only by humans, and becoming archaic)           shaking fever (disease), the
Purple Dragons                                        Shaking Plague
quarter-bench                                         Sha’Quessir (“elf friend” in Elvish)
Queen’s Guard (Evermeet)                              Sharn Wall, the
Queen’s Spellguard (Evermeet)                         shawm (a double-reed instrument, the ancestor of
Rage, the (in re: dragons)                            the oboe and bassoon)
Quiet Folk, the: gnomes                               sickstone
Rage of Dragons                                       silver fire
rellana (wine)                                        sky mage
Red Wizards                                           slaugh (it is the word elves use for “pigs,” but
Returned Abeir                                        literally translates as “mud-wallowing-dogs”)
Reverie, the                                          Sly Folk, the (halflings—mainly said by dwarves and
ripplebark (fungus)                                   humans)
Robes of the Archmage                                 smallhold (modest family farm)
roofwrack                                             smokethorn (tree)
rothé                                                 snortsnout (derogotory for orc)
rothéhide                                             snowfinch(es) (bird)
runner-lizard                                         soapleaf (tree)
sage probiter                                         songblast songspider
sallar (typhuslike disease)                           songhorn (a recorder)
sarrukh                                               sorn: drow (used only by eladrin, elves, and half-
saurial                                               elves, and drow themselves)
sava (chesslike game)                                 soulbinding
sceptrana                                             soultheft s
Scourged Legion                                       pellarcher
the Seldarine, the (elf pantheon)                     spellblade
selukiira (sing. or pl.)                              spell-guard
Selûne (the goddess and the Moon)                     spell-major (Myth Drannor)
Seraph                                                Spellplague, the (the event itself)
Seven, the (the seven liches that created             spellplague (pockets of the spellplague)
Crenshinibon)                                         spell-prison
Seven Sisters                                         spellchain
sha (“friend” in Elvish)                              spellfire
sha`ir                                                SpellGather (phaerimm)
Shade Enclave (what Shadovar call their city)         spellscar
Shadow Deep, the (or Deep, the)                       spellsinger
Shadowfell, the                                       spell-song
Shadow Fringe, the (or Fringe, the)                   spellscarred (someone who has been changed by
Shadow Magic                                          spellplague, but not to a monstrous extent)
shadow net                                            spellwarped (derogatory term for someone with a
shadow self                                           spellscar)
shadow shield                                         Spirit Soaring (not the Spirit Soaring)
shadowshell                                           Splicing, the
shadowalk(ing)                                        sporeflour bread (Underdark food staple)
shadow blanket                                        Spotted Plague (plague/disease)
shadow crisis                                         ssri Tel’Quessir
shadowsilk                                            standath
shadowstep                                            starsphere
Stone Guard (elite troops from Gracklstugh)               undermages
stonefire bomb                                            underpriest
stonelore                                                 underpriestesses
storehouse (pref. over warehouse)                         va (“father” in Elvish)
Stout Folk, the: dwarves                                  vae (“son” in Elvish)
stranglecord                                              vigilant sister (priestess of Shar)
swordmagic                                                Vyshaanti battle-platform V
swordmaster                                               yvadnya (Rashemen witch-lore)
swordwight                                                warchief
sy Tel’Quessir (“green or wild elf” in Elvish)            WarGather (phaerimm term)
Syluné (one of the Seven Sisters)                         wargong (also called a shieldgong, the wargong is
tael (Elvish for a student of bladesinging in Elvish,     often made of the shields of one’s vanquished foes.
singular and plural)                                      It is played with mallets)
tallglass                                                 warmaster
tanarukk                                                  warpriest
taol (coin)                                               war-dog
tantan (a tambourine)                                     war-golem
Taumaril (Cattie-brie’s bow)                              war-mage
Tears of Selûne, the                                      war-mythal
telkiira (sing. or pl.)                                   war wizard
telmiirkara neshyrr (Elvish, “the rite of                 watch-wizard
transformation.”)                                         watermote
telthor (the nature-spirits the Rashemi worship)          weapons master (not weapon master)
telthukiilir (High Seeing Orb)                            weathercloak
tenday (never week)                                       Weave, the
Ten-Towns                                                 web street
teu Tel’Quessir (“silver or moon elf” in Elvish)          weirwood (tree)
thelarr (also called the whistlecane, this is a simple    whipblade (a sort of rapier)
reed instrument)                                          whipdagger
theurglass                                                whitewasting (leprosylike disease)
thinblade (elven rapier)                                  winterchill fever (pneumonialike disease)
thornback (epithet for phaerimm)                          witchfire
thoughtspeech throatslake (drink)                         Witch-King (of Vaasa)
thunderthrone                                             World Above (Underdark term in ref. to the surface
tocken (set of carved, oval, open-ended bells, played     world)
like a xylophone)                                         world-window
Tomb Guard (elves only)                                   worms: goblins and small or puny orcs or other
Tower (Evermeet, but only in reference to the             goblinkin (used only by orcs)
institution, not the building)                            wristbow
Tower Guard (Evermeet)                                    wychlaran (Rashemi witches)
tradebar                                                  yaddleskwee
trademeet                                                 yarting (a guitar)
tradeyard                                                 Yor’thae
Undercity                                                 zaen’sheaen (“all-seeing gaze” in Elvish)
Underdark, the                                            zalanthar (tree)
ugrukh: wounded, defeated, slaves or those too            zulkoon (a complex and semiportable pump-organ)
weak to defend themselves or to be worthy of              zulkoon (musical instrument)
attention. (Used of all races, including their own, but   zurkhwood (a rare hardwood)
only by orcs)                                             zzar
Underhalls
