
===== PAGE 1 =====
Forgotten Realms Style G
The following guidelines are true for the Forgotten
set.
Tone
The Forgotten Realms is a hopeful setting. The goo
sets the Forgotten Realms apart from settings like
(which is a setting of romance and tragedy). While
should be hopeful (the villains need their time in th
tone in mind.
Replace Your Divots
Stories should leave the Forgotten Realms as they
the Forgotten Realms should not definitively destr
planes, races as a whole, or other established elem
dispensation. That doesn’t mean that stories can’t
jeopardy. Players of a D&D game have the option o
important elements of the IP, but there must alway
Don’t Whitewash the Realms
It’s easy to fall into the trap of making every chara
have done so. Lord of the Rings didn’t have anyone
besides, elves, dwarves, halflings, and gnomes are
No. That’s not right.
In fact, quite the opposite has been true for a lon
to consistently and appropriately represent the pe
Sun Elves. Sun elves have bronze skin. They look
Many have black hair.
Wood Elves. These people have coppery skin tin
Wild Elves. Their skin is dark brown, and their h
Gold Dwarves. Gold dwarves have black hair an
Rock Gnomes. Their skin ranges from a light bro
Strongheart Halflings. Strongheart halflings are
people from India for tone and color ranges).
Humans. The Forgotten Realms is a huge world
Chult provide sources of humans with black skin a
ethnicities (people from Wa and Kozakura look lik
Koreans, and so on). Calimshan, Zakara, and Anaur
Amn and Tethyr look like Spaniards. There are eve
Basically, any human race or ethnicity on earth has
Mulhorandi of the upper classes have yellow/sallo
who are extremely jaundiced).
It’s important to note that such folk shouldn’t be
you set something in Waterdeep, the most cosmop
be humans from all over the Realms and various et
seem less cosmopolitan might actually have more
--- col ---
Guide
n Realms, the world in which most products are
od guys will eventually win. This hopeful tone
Greyhawk (which is cynical) and Dragonlance
e not every moment of a story or image in art
he spotlight, and bad things do happen), keep this
found them. (Pack it in. Pack it out.) Stories set in
roy or irrevocably change locations, people, gods,
ments of the setting or brand without special
have high stakes with important things in
of failure or of causing the death or destruction of
ys be the option of things being restored to order.
acter have white skin. Most models for fantasy
e with anything other than white skin, and
white, right?
ng time in the Forgotten Realms but art has failed
eople of the Forgotten Realms.
k well-tanned all the time. Some have blond hair.
nged with green. Their hair is brown or black.
hair ranges from black to light brown.
nd brown skin.
own through white to a very light gray.
e dusky skinned with brown or black hair (think
with many earth analogs. Turmish, Tashluta, and
and features. Kara-Tur provides all the Asian
ke folk from Japan, Koryo has folk who look like
roch give us various Arab ethnicities. People from
en people who look like Eskimos and Mayans.
s a home in the Forgotten Realms. Thayans and
ow skin (not Asian but actually yellow, like people
e relegated to their home regions either. When
politan city in the world, there absolutely should
thnicities in Waterdavian dress. Places that might
reason for folk of other skin colors. Cormyr
===== PAGE 2 =====
seems like a Camelot analog, but it’s very near Tur
ancient Greece, and Sumer) are a boat ride away.
Lastly, although someone who is not white migh
where your project is set, that does not mean that
instance, black people from Turmish, Tashluta, and
decades (if not centuries) and thus they can dress
Gender Roles
As a rule, males and females should be depicted in
equal status regardless of the race or culture. The w
as the man. Avoid clichés that reinforce sexist stere
sexy barmaid, the hooker with the heart of gold, th
uses enticement to sex as “empowerment,” and so
There are two exceptions: orcs and Northlanders
North).
Orcs: Orc females remain behind with the young
misogynistic culture.
Northlanders: Northlanders expect their wome
by outsiders (meaning anyone not of their clan). In
work—both men and women weave, cook, brew, a
stay home when men go fishing or raiding.
Sex and Sexuality
Depictions of sex and romance between characters
D&D tends to be like an action movie without any l
identity does need to be portrayed, here are the gu
• Keep it PG. Avoid topics such as rape and molest
• Homosexuality and bisexuality are just as valid a
negative, for humor, or using stereotypes.
• People can have gender identities other than the
depicted as negative, for humor, or using stereotyp
Violence and Gore
Dungeons & Dragons has violence at its core, and b
of thumb, keep it PG. Occasionally more gore will b
decorate conquered places with slaughtered rema
range.
Technology
While often described as Medieval fantasy, D&D ha
Forgotten Realms, different locations and cultures
cities in the North generally have access to the tech
presses, movable type, hourglasses (called “sandgl
telescopes, spectacles, paper, windmills, watermill
in nobles’ houses), fountains, and viaducts.
--- col ---
rmish, and the Old Empires (analogs of Egypt,
ht come from a culture different from the area
the person must seem like a foreigner. For
d Chult have lived in Waterdeep and the North for
and speak as natives.
n equal measure and doing all the same jobs in
woman of the house is just as likely to go to war
eotypes about women: the damsel in distress, the
he slinky Catwoman-like thief, the woman who
on.
s (the Viking types, not just people who live in the
g when orcs go to war or raiding. It’s a
en and children to remain at home and not be seen
n the home, men and women do all the same
and tend to animals—but women are expected to
s should be rare in D&D stories. Novels aside,
love interests. If sex, sexual orientation, or gender
uidelines:
tation.
as heterosexuality and should not be depicted as
eir physical gender, but this should not be
pes.
blood and gore will often be appropriate. As a rule
be called for by the subject matter (gnolls
ains), but ask before you take gore into the R-rated
as a mix of technologies from various eras. In the
s have access to different technologies, but large
hnologies of the Renaissance and before: printing
lasses”), magnifying glasses, clocks (large ones),
ls, water screws, sewers, running water (mostly
===== PAGE 3 =====
Gears, Gadgets, Clockwork, and Autom
The islands of Lantan, worshipers of Gond (god of technolo
items of technology. When depicting these things, think m
These items should be more like something Leonardo Da V
Guns and Explosives
The Forgotten Realms has smokepowder, which is basicall
few, and it is primarily used for fireworks. People do not u
explosive except in extremely rare circumstances when jus
Magic Items
Unlike past editions, magic items of all kinds have
of healing or a vorpal sword always looks the same
descriptions and check them against the item’s app
item is not in that book, request a description from
Races
Below are some important facts to keep in mind ab
about them in order to depict them properly, but t
Elves
Elves live for centuries and any elf in a story is like
elf has lived through The Retreat, when elves large
the elf in the story either elected to stay or came ba
should have some gravitas and a history.
There are several distinct subraces of elves that
Handbook and Monster Manual.
Moon. Moon elves are neither as woodsy as woo
They are generally less aloof than sun elves and m
sun and wood elves. Moon elves are the most impu
for complacency and isolation.
Sun. Sun elves are the most magically inclined of
performing mighty feats of arcane magic for millen
nature and the wilderness. Although more inclined
the typical human or dwarf, they have built great c
shape and tame nature to suit their needs.
Wood. Long ago, different types of elves were fo
wanderers, living together amid nature as they mo
peoples blended, communicated, and created their
generations. As various elven empires fell—and es
elves have resettled the lands abandoned by their
these ancient elven homelands, but they are protec
of the past. They have lost the urge to build and re
cities built by their elven kin seem to be foolish to
elves, and those forests are what need protecting.
--- col ---
matons
ogy), and certain rock gnomes create more advanced
more in terms of wood and canvass than metal and bolts.
Vinci would make, not Victorian-era steampunk.
ly like gunpowder. Its creation is a secret known to only a
use guns or cannons. Smokepowder is not used as an
stified by a story link to a smokepowder source.
specific appearances that do not change. A potion
e regardless of who made it. Watch for magic item
pearance in the Dungeon Master’s Guide. If the
m us.
bout the D&D races. There’s much more to know
these facts are often overlooked.
ely a couple centuries old at least. That means the
ely left their traditional lands for Evermeet. Ergo
back to the world for some reason. Every elf
are different from those described in the Player’s
od elves, nor as magically inclined as sun elves.
more willing to engage with other races than both
ulsive of the elf subraces, with a strong distaste
f the elf subraces. Their wizards have been
nnia. Sun elves are also the least inclined toward
d to protect and live with the natural world than
cities of stone in the past, and they commonly
orced out of their homelands and became
oved rather than building new cities. These
r own culture, becoming wood elves over the
specially with the advent of the Retreat—wood
cousins. They see themselves as protectors of
ctive of elven right to the place, not the buildings
eplace nature with walls and palaces; even the
the wood elves. The forest is the true home of the
===== PAGE 4 =====
Wood elves aren’t as winsome and flighty as thei
Handbook describes. They are are calm, serene, an
As a people wood elves are largely seen as level-he
emotions in wood elves is not something that is ea
aversion for large cities.
Wood elves have a notable disinterest in the arca
little different from the mason's castle walls or the
world, which is contrary to the common ethic of liv
dominate it that so many wood elves espouse. The
magic of druids and thus have more druids among
wild elves.
Drow: Drow largely map to the material in the M
into the Underdark is more complex (sun elves ma
dark elf empire, thus provoking the dark elves to a
with males subordinate and downtrodden.
Wild. Wild elves are almost never seen outside t
of Faerûn (Chondalwood, the Forest of Amtar, the
empires millennia ago, but unlike the wood elves, t
elven cousins, becoming insular and savage. The w
so than other elves, but they have forgotten many
stealth and survival over building and book learnin
neither like outsiders nor tolerate any offense to th
provoked.
Avariel. Avariel are winged elves and extremely
settlement in the world that is far to the north of th
not be used in stories.
Dwarves
There are two subraces of dwarves and the duerga
Shield. Like the elves, the shield dwarves lost th
fallen long ago. Now they live in the remnants of th
rebuild old glories. They tend to be irascible and b
Gold. Gold dwarves never lost their greatness. T
weathered many dangers and endured. They come
often foreigners to the North drawn by the opportu
typically flush with cash, privilege, and pride.
Halflings
There are two halfling subraces in the Forgotten R
Lightfoot: The folk of Faerûn are more familiar w
stronghearts, primarily because the lightfoots are
halflings. Nearly every human community of any si
residents. When most Faerûnians think of halflings
leap to mind.
Lightfoots a naturally curious people, always wo
what stories a new person might be able to tell the
as any other race, they certainly prefer to be happy
with surprising alacrity.
--- col ---
ir description in the Monster Manual and Player’s
nd difficult to surprise. Their patience is legendary.
eaded and somewhat grim. Arousing strong
asily done, although many do have a strong
ane arts. To a wood elf, the wizard's spells are
e tiller's plow—a means of controlling the natural
ving in harmony with nature rather than trying to
ey do however, take a great interest in the nature
g them than any other elves except perhaps the
Monster Manual but the reason for their decent
ade a genocidal attack that destroyed an entire
ally with demons). They are also very matriarchal,
their forest homes in the hot south-central areas
Shaar). Like the wood elves, wild elves lost their
the wild elves severed connections from their
wild elves were always close to nature, even more
of the high arts and lore of their people, choosing
ng. Wild elves are a quiet, withdrawn people who
heir person. They are quick to violence if
y small in number, coming from just one
he center of Faerûn (near Sossal). They should
ar (or gray dwarves).
heir great empires and kingdoms, many having
hose grand empires or seek to discover and
boisterous when happy, and dour when not.
Their mighty empire in the Great Rift has
e mainly from south-central Faerûn and thus are
tunity to claim great wealth. Gold dwarves are
Realms.
with the lightfoot halflings than with the
the most numerous and widely traveled of all the
size larger than a village has at least a few halfling
s, the lightfoots are the people that most often
ondering what might lie around the next bend or
em. While lightfoot halflings can be as dour or sad
y and often bounce back from emotional setbacks
===== PAGE 5 =====
Members of the lightfoot subrace wander out of
lightfoot halflings or even entire families to decide
they want to move on to someplace else. They seem
different places and enjoy a variety of experiences
Strongheart: Strongheart halflings have a cultur
in which businesses, families, and even entire clan
place. They have homes, farms, and towns that the
but as a people they migrate around them accordin
shared space. This fusion of wanderlust and stabili
visitors, who find it difficult to comprehend how a
mobility while retaining any viable structure. For t
understand why anyone would want to tie themse
structure for their entire lives.
Their strange duality of nature, consisting of a de
permanent structures and settlements, has produc
stronghearts. Their viewpoint stresses cooperation
a team is the most valued behavior in their lands. C
even strangers of whom the locals are suspicious c
tolerance by demonstrating a willingness to coope
Gnomes
There are two subraces of gnomes on the surface a
gnomes). Rock gnomes are tinkerers and alchemis
illusionists and tricksters. They’re intellectuals wit
and peaceful woodsmen and animal lovers who us
reflective.
Gnomes never play a large role in history. They h
cities. They are not a numerous race, and indeed, t
Avoiding the notice of larger folk obsessed with em
spread across the world in tiny settlements and hi
by their neighbors.
Gnomes sometimes play the role of intermediary
gnomes as their friends, but even fewer consider th
embroiled in war, remaining neutral in such things
about which the gnomes care little, such as rights o
achieve and wield power in the world at large.
Rock Gnomes: When most people think of gnom
reclusive cousins, the deep gnomes and the forest
loquacious people. They are renowned throughout
inventors. Yet most do not care much for living in l
demand, and prefer the rolling hills of the countrys
display an amazing zest for life and all the pleasure
Rock gnomes are far friendlier and more outgoin
known for their love of jokes and pranks, as well a
Rock gnomes are generally optimistic. They view
infinite wisdom—have laid out before them as the
met. It is their greatest joy to be involved in the un
feel brings them closer to the gods with each passi
In their adolescence, rock gnomes are encourage
possible. Eventually, each gnome finds something
--- col ---
an innate desire. It is not unknown for individual
e that, after living in the same place for decades,
m to experience a habitual need to see many
s.
re unique in the world—a semi-nomadic lifestyle,
ns move freely and independently from place to
ey have lived in for decades and even centuries,
ng to time-honored schedules, treating them as
ity is a source of wonderment and confusion for
society can enjoy such seemingly whimsical
their part, most of the stronghearts cannot
elves permanently to any one community or
esire to move about freely with a liking for
ced some unusual outlooks among the
n above all other traits, and the ability to work as
Cooperation transcends many boundaries, and
can earn themselves considerable credit and
erate
and then the subterranean svirfneblin (deep
sts (not steampunk scientists) as well as
th various quirks. Forest gnomes are reclusive
se illusions to hide. They’re quiet and self-
have not founded nations, nor do they build great
they survive and thrive by keeping a low profile.
mpires and mighty magic, gnomes have quietly
idden villages that often go completely unnoticed
y between other races or peoples. Few count the
the gnomes their enemies. Gnomes rarely become
s because wars are usually fought over goals
of commerce and settlement, or the drive to
mes, they think of rock gnomes. Unlike their
gnomes, rock gnomes are an inquisitive and
t the world as technicians, alchemists, and
larger cities, where their talents are in high
side. But anywhere they find themselves, they
es it holds.
ng than the other gnome subraces. They are well
as their fondness for finely made things.
w the world as a puzzle that the gods—in their
e ultimate challenge, one that cannot ever be fully
nraveling of the mysteries of creation, an act they
ing day.
ed to dabble in as many different things as
that truly intrigues him or her, fires the
===== PAGE 6 =====
imagination, and sets the gnome on the path of a ca
Almost every rock gnome had a passion for what s
that they have such positive dispositions.
While most gnomes are homebodies at heart, a n
the world to explore. Inquisitive by nature, gnome
everything they can to learn about anything they w
Forest Gnomes: Forest gnomes are shy and elus
when dire emergencies threaten their beloved hom
of the forest’s creatures, and can pass through thei
befriend small animals, relying on them for inform
lands.
Forest gnomes are so reclusive that many times
find that the forest gnomes have been living nearb
painfully shy that they go to great lengths to avoid
to break their silence. Whereas the rock gnomes ar
are sullen and reserved, the forest gnomes are pra
They have a great love for nature, particularly deep
reason, many people—including other kinds of gno
forest gnomes are extremely private, preferring to
among their own kind, they are a bit less reserved.
Forest gnomes maintain a strong tradition of ins
all forest gnomes have the knack for wizardry, gen
their blood and all forest gnomes can craft minor i
one another with simple pranks and complicated g
threatens forest gnomes work together to make ill
Svirfneblin: Svirfneblin, or deep gnomes, live am
the surface of the world in twisting warrens and sc
stealth, watchfulness, and tenacity.
Deep gnomes are gnarled and callused folk, with
the color of the rocks among which they live, almo
themselves. They have dark gray eyes, tending tow
although it’s only seen on the women, as the men a
Svirfneblin keep to themselves out of fear of outs
experiences with such people. To a deep gnome, th
gnomes from your village, and preferably from you
strangers, most deep gnomes are reserved and sus
are alone with their own kind, they are friendly an
outside a svirfneblin community have ever seen th
their part, the deep gnomes would be horrified to f
find such a person staring at them—or even lookin
All gnomes pay homage to a pantheon of gnome
but svirfneblin are most devoted to the Deep Broth
was the first to discover the beauty of gems, having
rubbed it to smooth brilliance in his pocket. He we
who followed him became the svirfneblin. Deep gn
tunneling, having particular regard for large emera
can enchant to summon earth elementals.
--- col ---
areer that may last the rest of the gnome’s life.
she does for a living, which is one of the reasons
number simply can’t resist the urge to go out into
es often find themselves almost compelled to do
want.
sive, shunning contact with other races except
mes. They know the secret names and languages
ir woodlands without leaving a trace. They often
mation about threats that might infringe on their
bigger people have “discovered” them, only to
by for centuries. Forest gnomes are so quiet and
d contact with others unless there is a great need
re friendly and loquacious and the deep gnomes
actically invisible, the wallflowers of the gnomes.
p and quiet forests far from civilization. For this
omes—have never seen a forest gnome. Most
o simply be left alone by other peoples. When
.
struction in magic, particularly illusions. While not
nerations of devotion to the craft has put magic in
illusions. In private they use this ability to amuse
games only possible with magic, but when danger
lusions that hide their homes or mislead enemies.
mid the dangers of the Underdark deep beneath
culpted caverns. They survive by virtue of their
h little fat at all on their wiry bodies. Their skin is
ost as if they sprang directly from the stones
ward black. Their hair is of a similar color,
are entirely bald and beardless.
siders—a fear born from numerous poor
he only people you can trust are other deep
ur family. All others are best avoided. With
spicious, almost to a fault. However, when they
nd respectful to each other. Few people from
his more pleasant side of the deep gnomes. For
find themselves observed by outsiders, and they
ng directly at them—quite rude.
deities led by the trickster-hero, Garl Glittergold,
her, Callarduran. Legend has it that Callarduran
g picked up a rough stone and absentmindedly
ent into a cave in pursuit of more, and the gnomes
nomes still pursue gems of all types in their
alds, which with the blessings of their priests they
===== PAGE 7 =====
Half-Elves
Half-elves aren’t the diplomats described in the Pla
instead individuals trapped between two worlds—
welcomes them.
Except in a few places in Faerûn, half elves do no
union between elf and human, but such relationsh
other parent or when cultural differences drive pa
briefer encounters between elf and human or betw
This means that although there might be similar
friends left behind in youth, the upbringing of each
elf emphasizes the qualities of one parent race or t
more like an elf due to being raised among them, w
still another might act more elven than an elf in or
up with.
Half-elves have at least one elven parent or gran
another way, the child of a half-elf and a human wi
child of a full-blooded elf. Unless a half-elven line m
their elf characteristics fade in a couple generation
otherwise human children born several generation
very rare.
While elves and half-elves are respected and adm
where elves are not commonly encountered can be
attractive, long-lived, mysterious, and skilled with
them well can easily come to regard elves—and, by
places such as Silverymoon or the Dalelands, a half
little or no bigotry. In lands where there is a long h
Sembia, her elven blood marks her as different and
might expect. On the other hand, half-elves born in
patronizing prejudice instead of fear. A half-elf wil
expect half-elves to be unwisely brash and impatie
Most half-elves are a bit distant, used to being ca
respond to the suspicions and slights of their huma
civilization, preferring a solitary life in the wildern
travel, never staying in one spot long enough for ra
around them.
Half-Orcs
Half-orcs are originally the product of a union betw
half-elf. There are rare places where orcs and barb
where such unions might occur through mutual re
in their past. However, orc blood runs strong. It tak
diluted that a child might be born looking fully hum
half-orc.
Whether by nurture or nature, half-orcs tend to b
uphill battles to fight when interacting with most o
weak and cowardly by nature. Among others they
Most half-orcs react this prejudice with anger. The
established, it is often a fleeting thing that can be fr
--- col ---
ayer’s Handbook and Monster Manual. They are
—human and elf—neither of which entirely
ot appear in great numbers. Each is the result of a
hips often come to sad ends as an elf outlives the
arents apart. Some half-elves are the result of
ween two half-elves, but this is extremely rare.
r themes of prejudice, tragedy, and of homes and
h half-elf is unique, and the way in which the half-
the other differ. One half-elf might think and act
while another might act more like a human, and
rder to separate himself from the humans he grew
ndparent, or two half-elven parents. To put it
ill be human, unless the half-elf parent was the
marries into other elven or half-elven families,
ns. On occasion elven traits can reappear in
ns later, but half-elves of such remote descent are
mired in many parts of Faerûn, humans in lands
e resentful of elven blood. Elves are graceful,
mighty magic, and humans who do not know
y extension, half-elves—with envy and fear. In
f-elf’s race is nothing remarkable, and she faces
history of elven-human conflict, such as Tethyr or
d dangerous, with all the fears and suspicions one
n elven communities almost always experience
ll not live as long, nor be as nimble, and elves
ent.
ast in the role of outsiders. Many half-elves
an neighbors by staying well away from human
nesses of Faerûn. Others instead take up a life of
acial prejudices to distance them from the folk
ween orc and human, or more rarely orc and elf or
baric humans have lived in close association
espect, but most half-orcs have the tragedy of rape
kes a few generations for orc blood to be so
man, and even then, a sibling might appear to be a
be sullen and quick-tempered. Half-orcs have
other races. Among orcs they are considered
are feared as violent and thought to be stupid.
ey make friends only with difficulty. Once trust is
ractured with one misinterpreted comment.
===== PAGE 8 =====
Tieflings
Like half-orcs and helf-elves, tieflings are quite rar
never thins. The child of any tiefling looks like a tie
ancestor has congress with a devil. All tieflings are
That’s not easy to live down. The conflict their her
others—tends to define who they are.
Dragonborn
Except for Tymanther and the region around it, dra
NPC Races
When choosing a race for an NPC consider the story impac
of the races noted above, but a shopkeeper, the local sage
from a race common to the setting, which in most cases is
half-elves, half-orcs, forest gnomes, tieflings, and dragonb
a choice for the sake of variety.
Classes
There a lot more to know about the various classes
mind when depicting characters with a D&D class
Spellcasters in General: Except for extremely u
wizardry) spellcasters are individuals. They have p
spell lists. You shouldn’t encounter the same wizar
different wizards, for instance.
Barbarians. The Forgotten Realms has cultures
called barbarian, but they are not synonymous. Pe
even in barbarian tribes.
Clerics. Clerics are special individuals gifted wit
gods on speed dial nor are the gods constantly wat
astray of a deity’s ethos or even betray their deity.
or saved until the afterlife, based upon the whim o
Druids. Druids are not clerics by another name a
(The only exception is druids of the Moonshaes, w
by their islands.) Instead, druids (regardless of rac
pantheon of human gods that represent the basic e
darkness, Selune for the moon, Silvanus for forests
Druids from non-human races often pay homage to
the power of druidic magic stems from the First Ci
circle of druids from which they originate, the circ
druids that are part of it as a body of wisdom, lore,
Monks. Monks are not monastic priests in the Ch
the Eastern sense. Monks are rare in Faerûn and q
hundreds of orders of monks in Kara-Tur, but Faer
associated with a human religious order, acting as
enforcers or assassins. Some of the few Faerûnian
Yielding Way, Yellow Rose, and Sun Soul.
Paladins. Paladins are warriors of unusual virtu
power. Paladins follow a common code of ethics bu
different aspects. (A paladin of Sune would empha
--- col ---
re. But unlike both those races, tiefling blood
efling no matter how many generations ago an
e visibly touched by the evil of the Nine Hells.
ritage causes—within themselves and with
ragonborn are extremely rare.
ct of the races. Any exceptional character might be of any
e, or other inconsequential figures in a story should be
s a human, a halfling, a dwarf, or a rock gnome. Elves,
born all should have some story weight and not be simply
s of D&D, but below are some elements to keep in
in the Forgotten Realms.
unusual circumstances (such as a college of
personalities and personal stories and unique
rd stat block in an adventure used to represent
described as barbarians and D&D has the class
eople with the barbarian class are special warriors
th divine power by a deity, but they don’t have the
tching their every move. Clerics of a deity can go
. Judgment of such infractions might be immediate
of the deity.
and do not devote themselves to a single deity.
who worship the Great Mother, a deity embodied
ce) pay homage to the “First Circle,” which is a
elements of the natural world (Shar for night and
s, Talos for storms, Kossuth for fire, and so on).
o nature-related deities of their own as well, but
ircle. Most druid characters should acknowledge a
cle being a group of druids that serves all the
, and news.
hristian sense, but meditative martial artists in
quite common in Kara-Tur. There are dozens if not
rûn hosts only a few. Most monks of Faerûn are
protectors of holy sites and sometimes as
monastic orders are Dark Moon, Shining Hand,
ue and piety rewarded by a good god with divine
ut paladins of different deities emphasize
asize aspects of courtly love and courtesy,
===== PAGE 9 =====
whereas a paladin of Tyr would be more concerne
clerics, paladins can go astray of their code, but pa
harshly by their gods.
Rangers. Low-level rangers can be depicted like
ranger has spellcasting, that ranger has been chose
with spellcasting should show devotion to a specif
alignment (Malar, Shaundakul, Gwaeron Windstro
Sorcerer. The source of a sorcerer’s power shou
story.
Warlocks. Warlocks always have a patron and a
such a character and that character’s part in any pl
details. Note that not all the Great Old One patrons
appropriate to the Forgotten Realms. Of the ones m
Kezef, the Chaos Hound, and Dendar, the Night Ser
Wizards. In addition to a spellbook, a wizard in
wizard’s symbol and is used in various spells and r
extremely rare for a wizard to have a familiar.
Game Terms in the World
Most game terms like “saving throw,” “level,” and s
world use. Below are some special notes about ter
Adventurer. “Adventurer” is a word that describ
that being people who brave dangers to make thei
Just as a bodyguard or assassin is a type of mercen
adventurer.
Barbarian. “Barbarian” is used for anyone thoug
class. Individuals who have the class and can there
another name that sets them apart (berserker, dw
Bard. This word is reserved for people who have
regular minstrels, musicians, and singers lack.
Class. “Class” is not a term anyone would use to
sense.
Cleric. A priest is anyone who devotes themselv
maintenance of a shrine or temple (to one or more
spells by a particular deity. People in the world wo
priest without powers a cleric.
Druid. A druid is always a member of the class. P
Fighter. People in the world use the word “fight
fights; a boxer is a fighter. An adventurer who has
warrior.
Forgotten Realms. “Forgotten Realms” or “the R
use.
Mage. “Mage” is nonspecific a term used in the w
refers to wizards, but it can be used for sorcerers a
Monk. “Monk” is a term used like we use it. It ref
monastery setting (and therefor a member of the m
religious order that have a European-style monast
Paladin. Paladins are all members of the paladin
with special powers.
--- col ---
ed with justice and fair treatment of foes.) As with
aladins are typically judged more swiftly and
e mountain men and wilderness guides. Once a
en by a nature deity and granted power. Rangers
fic nature deity depending on the ranger’s
om. Milikki, Silvanus, Eldath, Shialia).
uld be a significant element of the character’s
a bargain. Those things should be a huge part of
lot. Ask for appropriate options for a patron and
s mentioned in the Player’s Handbook are
mentioned, Ghaunadar, called That Which Lurks;
rpent, exist in Faerûn.
the Forgotten Realms crafts a sigil that is the
rituals to represent the wizard. Also, it is
so on are obviously not something people in the
rminology where the distinction is less clear.
bes people of a certain occupation or lifestyle,
ir fortunes. It’s a broad term, not a specific one:
nary, tomb robber and explorer are types of
ght to be barbaric, not just people who have the
efor enter a battle rage are often referred to by
warven battlerager, and so on).
e the bard class. They have magical powers that
refer to people that have a class in the game
ves to the service of a deity and/or the
e deities). A “cleric” is someone who is granted
ould call a cleric a priest, but they would not call a
People do use the word “druid” to refer to them.
ter” like we do. It’s a word for someone who
the fighter class would likely refer to himself as a
Realms” is not a term people in the world know or
world to for arcane spellcasters. It most often
and warlocks.
fers both to people trained in a martial art at a
monk class), and it refers to members of a
tic lifestyle.
n class. They are recognized as individuals imbued
===== PAGE 10 =====
Ranger. Rangers are members of the ranger clas
survivalists. They are imbued with special powers
Sorcerer, Warlock, and Wizard. These terms a
to members of the respective classes. However, to
Anyone with knowledge of the arcane arts knows t
people, any of these terms might be ascribed to an
used accurately when confusion might arise: An NP
the person to which the NPC refers is a warlock un
Religion
Below are a few notes to keep in mind for depictio
Polytheism. People in the Forgotten Realms are
many gods for a variety of reasons. Various races a
but all acknowledge the existence of other deities t
Temples and Shrines. The temples of deities in
churches. They do not have pews. People do not at
worship place of a deity or a number of deities wil
not even have structures built for worshipers to go
god of storms and natural disasters, does not typic
Priests vs. Clerics. A priest is anyone who decid
maintaining the rites and traditions of the religion
priests, not clerics. Clerics are holy warriors specia
That power has a purpose, and its rare that the pur
Distant Gods. Although gods have walked the w
unknowable. Stories can focus on the activities of t
names, but should not focus on what the gods them
Formerly Dead Deities: Temples and th
With the Sundering ending in roughly the fall of 1487, it do
time to reassert themselves. So if there's a priest of Jergal
vanguard of the faithful who return to the worship of the g
personally, met someone who had who converted them, o
Sundering.
Similarly, if there's a temple in a location that is dedicat
origin. It’s unlikely a group “kept the faith” for more than a
be abandoned, taken over by some other inhabitants, or u
If it's a new creation for the setting, then the faithful migh
building.
Always check if a god was dead before the Sundering. G
listed in the 4th Edition Forgotten Realms Campaign Settin
alive (monster deities being the most obvious exception).
Time and the Calendar
The Faerûnian year is 365 days long. The year is di
coinciding with the waxing and waning of Selune, t
lieu of weeks, each month is divided into three ten
--- col ---
ss, not merely woodsmen, mountaineers, or
s.
are distinct and have separate meanings, referring
many people in the world they are synonymous.
the distinguishing elements, but to common
n arcane spellcaster. That said, the terms should be
PC’s dialog should not say “sorcerer” when in fact
nless the intent is to confuse the audience.
ons of religion in the Forgotten Realms.
e polytheistic. They worship and acknowledge
and cultures favor some sets of gods over others,
than those they favor.
n the Forgotten Realms do not look like Christian
ttend Sunday service. The appearance of the
ll depend on the deities involved. Many deities do
o to (Eldath is honored at sacred ponds. Talos,
cally have temples built in his honor.)
des to dedicate themselves to honoring a deity and
n. Most temples and shrines are attended by
ally gifted by a god (or gods) with divine power.
rpose would be to tend to a building.
world in the past, they are now more distant and
the faithful of the deities and what they do in their
mselves are doing or what the gods want.
he Faithful
oesn't give the faithful of the returned deities a lot of
l or a paladin of Tyr in a story, that person is on the
god. The person either felt the touch of the diety
or heard stories of the Chosen of that deity during the
ted to one of the newly returned deities, think about its
a century. If it is from a 3E or 2E source, then it might still
used for the worship of other similar deities in the interim.
ht have taken over an old structure or it might be a new
Gods known to be alive at the start of the Sundering are
ng, but that list doesn’t contain all deities that could be
Please ask if you’re not certain.
ivided into twelve months of thirty days—loosely
the moon of Toril—and five annual holidays. In
ndays, also known as rides. Once every four years,
===== PAGE 11 =====
Shieldmeet is added to the Calendar of Harptos as
night.
Particular days of the tenday have no special nam
counting from the beginning of the tenday. For exa
so on (or alternatively “one-day,” “two-day” etc.). T
time when businesses close or people stop work.
Days of the month are noted as numbers followe
record a date as occurring on “1 Mirtul” or “27 Ukt
Days are 24 hours long.
Keeping Time. Most people do not keep track of
typically not aware of the concept of hours or minu
“mid morning” or “nigh sunset.” If two people plan
hazy and that someone might be waiting or arrive
The concept of “hours” and “minutes” exists in p
mechanical clocks are often unrealiable and they a
temple or civic structure has a clock, people refer t
bells.”
The Calendar of Harptos
Earth Month Faerûn Month
December Hammer
Annual Holiday: Midwinter (Winter
January Alturiak
February Ches
March Tarsahk
Annual Holiday: Greengrass (Spring
April Mirtul
May Kythorn
June Flamerule
Annual Holiday: Midsummer (Summ
Quadrannual Holiday: Shieldmeet
July Eleasis
August Elient
Annual Holiday: Highharvestide
September Marpenoth
October Uktar (Autumn Equinox, 1st day)
Annual Holiday: The Feast of the Mo
November Nightal
Flora
All the normal earthly plants can be found on Toril
Blueleaf. Recognizable by the eerie, gleaming bl
(not “blueleaves”) bend in winds or under ice rath
shelter winter travelers. Blueleafs grow close toge
rarely attaining thick trunks.
Blueleaf wood is durable, and the sap and crushe
cloak making in the North. When burned, it yields
--- col ---
a “leap day” immediately following Midsummer
mes. Instead, days of the tenday are denoted by
ample, “first day,” “second day,” “third day,” and
There is no concept of the weekend as a special
ed by the month name. For example, sages might
tar” or “Midsummer.”
f time. The sun does that for them. They are
utes. People are accustomed to loose times like
n to meet at a particular time, they expect it to be
early.
places where wealthy people use clocks, but
are rarely set for exactly the same time. If a local
to hours as “bells,” as in “I’ll meet you at seven
Common Name
Deepwinter (new year starts Hammer 1)
Solstice)
The Claw of Winter
The Claw of Sunsets
The Claw of Storms
Equinox)
The Melting
The Time of Flowers
Summertide
mer Solstice)
Highsun
The Fading
Leaffall
The Rotting
oon
The Drawing Down
l, but there are some plants unique to the setting.
lue color of their many-pointed leaves, blueleafs
her than breaking, often forming snow tunnels that
ether in thick stands, reaching 40 feet in height but
ed leaves yield a vivid blue dye much favored in
beautiful leaping blue flames (prized in inns and
===== PAGE 12 =====
taverns as “mood” illumination for tale-tellers and
“green” and a gray-blue color when dried.
Blueleaf is found all over the north.
Duskwood. Duskwood trees grow straight and t
dark, smooth, and bare; all of their tiny branches a
slim silvery leaves. Their name comes from the dar
Under their black bark is smoky grey wood that is
rather than blazing, so that they survive many fore
firewood). It could be found growing all over Faerû
ended up looking a bit eerie.
Chuichu. Chuichu trees are found mainly in the f
hickories, about three feet tall. Chuichu trees prod
water to make a delicious, cinnamon-flavored beve
Helmthorn. A vinelike ground shrub that somet
helmthorn has dark, waxy green leaves and bristlin
sharp, durable thorns are often used as crude need
in hue, edible (tart in flavor), and often harvested e
winemaking. Helmthorn is very hardy and grows t
Shadowtop. The soaring giants of Faerûnian for
out at 90 feet. A full-grown shadowtop flares out to
trunk surrounded by many pleatlike ridges. Shado
feathery leaves at the tops of their trunks. Shadow
undersides and deep green upper surfaces.
Shadow-wood is fibrous and tough, but unsuitab
stress it splits down its length into splayed fibers. T
added to the twist improves the strength and dura
cleanly, generating a very hot fire with little smoke
Shadow-wood is much used in the making of ma
found in all humid areas across Faerûn.
Silverbark. Silverbark trees flourish in wet grou
trunks three to four inches in diameter, are straigh
serving the poor as poles, staves, and (with whittle
battle-stakes. Silverbark is plentiful and grows in t
easily; an exposed tree dries out thoroughly, becom
fence rails, or building work, within a year. Its larg
(purple at the roots), waxy, and durable; they are s
twigs.
Suth. Suth are graybark trees with olive-green le
double back to angle in another direction. If a few s
intertwine until they are inextricably entangled, fo
things that can’t fly over the tangled trees or scuttl
long, soft, and fluffy, but spike-ended.
Suth wood is very hard and durable, so hard that
Thin sheets of this wood retain astonishing strengt
book covers. Suth is also the preferred wood for sh
fire if soaked in water before battle. A crushing blo
cause it to fly apart. Suth wood is naturally a reddi
The name of this tree may be a corruption of the
the Shaar, in the woods of Chondath, and farther so
--- col ---
d minstrels). Cut blueleaf has a blue hue when
tall, reaching 60’ feet in height. Their trunks are
are in a crown at the top of each tree. They have
rk, eerie appearance of stands of duskwoods.
as hard as iron, and resistant to fire (smoldering
est fires and the axes of woodcutters seeking
ûn. They gow in densely packed groves which
forests of the Dalelands. They resemble miniature
duce cone-shaped yellow berries that dissolve in
erage.
times cloaks other bushes and dead trees,
ng black thorns. As long as human hands, these
dles or dart points. Helmthorn berries are indigo
even when frozen or withered for use in
throughout Faerûn, providing food for many.
rests, shadowtops can grow 2 feet a year and top
o a diameter of 10 feet or more at its base, its
owtops are named for the dense clusters of
wtop leaves are irregular in shape and have copper
ble for carving or structural work because under
These fibers are valued in rope making (a few
ability of a completed coil) and burns slowly but
e. This makes it ideal for cooking.
agical staffs, rods, and wands. Shadowtops are
und and deep shadowy ravines. They have thin
ht, and seldom grow more than a dozen feet tall—
ed points hardened in a slow fire) spears or
thickets. Its silvery bark crumbles and pulls loose
ming brittle and weak, unsuitable for lance shafts,
ge, oval, pointed-tipped leaves are deep red
sometimes used to wrap small game, or to carry
eaves. They grow almost horizontally and then
suth trees grow together, their branches
orming a screen or wall barring passage to all
le under their lowest branches. Suth leaves are
t it’s difficult to work without the finest tools.
gth for decades, and thus are favored for use in
hields since it never shatters and doesn’t catch
ow might crack a suth-wood shield but won’t
ish brown.
e word “south.” Suth are found along the edges of
outh in Faerûn.
===== PAGE 13 =====
Weirwood. Weir trees resemble oaks but have l
their uppers and velvety black beneath. If undistur
forest giants. Weirwood won’t ignite in normal (no
favored in the making of musical instruments beca
imparts. Weirwood is a dark brown when dried.
Weirwood can be used as a replacement for oak
but is very rare. Most trees are now found deep in
treants, druids, and rangers.
Zalantar. Often called blackwood in the North b
zalantar tree has a central root and eight or more t
level like the splayed fingers of a hand. The trees m
that. Their leaves are white through beige.
Zalantar wood is strong yet easily worked and se
making of wagons, litters, and wheels. Southern w
zalantar wood almost exclusively in the making of
This subtropical species is rarely seen north of th
and the southern coasts of Faerûn and seems to gr
Human Languages
There are easily over two dozen human languages
much everyone speaks Common, and to make cons
likely best that an electronic game, film, novel, and
language is spoken unless it is using the idea to inf
some reason desirable.
Below is a sampling of the various human langua
LANGUAGE AREA OR PEOPLE
Aglarondan Aglarond
Akûrian Samarach, Thindol, Tashluta,
the Black and Mhair Jungles,
Nanubel, Mhairhetel
Alzhedo Calimshan
Bothii Uthgardt barbarians,
Hartsvale
Chessentan Chessenta
Chondathan Central Faerûn from the
Sword Coast to the Sea of
Fallen Stars (Cormyr,
Dalelands, Waterdeep, Sembia,
and so on)
Chultan Chult
Damaran Damara, Vaasa
Dambrathan Dambrath
Durpari Durpar
Halruaan Halruaa
Illuskan The North (The Savage
Frontier)
Koryo Koryo
Kozakuran Kozakura
--- col ---
leaves that are brown (with a silver sheen) on
rbed, weir trees grow into huge, many-branched
on- magical) fire and is resilient and durable. It’s
ause of the unmistakable warm, clear tone it
or holly in any spell. It grows throughout Faerûn
large forests and actively protected by dryads,
because of its jet-black wood and bark, the
trunks that branch out from the root at ground
may reach 60 feet in height, but are usually half
ees much use in southern buildings and the
wizards and sorcerers use durable and handsome
rods, staffs, and wands.
he Shaar. It is plentiful along the shores of Chult
row in any terrain short of mountainous.
s and various human dialects. But because pretty
suming a Forgotten Relams product easier, it’s
d even D&D RPG product ignores that another
form a spoken accent, or a language barrier is for
ages and where you can find them spoken.
Lantanese Lantan
Laothan Malatra
Midani Zakhara, Bedine nomads of
Anauroch
Mulhorandi Mulhorand
Nexalan Maztica
Rashemi Rashemen
Reghedjic Reghedmen (Icewind Dale
Barbarians)
Shaaran The Shaar
Shou Shou Lung, T'u Lung, Ra-Khati,
Tabot
Tashalan Tashalar
Thayan Thay
Thorasta Western Heartlands, Baldur’s
Gate
Tuigan Hordelands
Turmic Turmish
Uluik Ice Hunters, Ulutiun
Untheric Unther
Wa-an Wa
Waelan Moonshae Isles
===== PAGE 14 =====
The Common Tongue
All speaking peoples, including the humans of various land
many nonhumans speak Common as a second language. C
most closely related to that language, but it is far simpler a
phrasing are better conveyed in the older, more mature la
language.
The great advantage of Common, of course, is its preval
and thus speaks Common well enough to get by in any but
just about everybody knows enough Common to speak it b
For the purposes of electronic games and film, it’s simpl
everyone uses it as their everyday language. Other langua
necessary language barrier.
Alphabets
The language symbology of earth—be it the Roman
kanji—does not exist in the Forgotten Realms. The
many cultures (Egyptian, Chinese, Mayan, and so o
true, for electronic games and other products whe
should probably use English. In any event, none of
true languages (although we do have some words
Thorass: Thorass is the direct ancestor of today
no one speaks Thorass anymore, its alphabet survi
tongues.
Espruar: Espruar is the moon elven alphabet. It
elven peoples thousands of years ago.
Dethek: Dethek is the dwarven runic script. Dwa
easily. They inscribe runes on metal sheets or carv
straight to facilitate their being carved in stone. As
between sentences, punctuation is ignored. If any p
emphasis, names of beings and places are picked o
black or left as unadorned grooves.
Others: There are also scripts for Draconic, Cele
Forgotten Realms Phrases
Below are some phrases common to speah in the F
Well met. The most often used greeting, particu
those of whom one is unsure.
Well again. Between business associates or acqu
“again”—and you look well) is usually used; if one
says, “Again” (i.e. “we meet again” or “you again!”)
Olore. (Oh-LOR-ay) Well met/Good day, as trave
friends.”
Until swords part. Warriors’ farewell througho
Until next, may your sword be ever wet, and y
Inner Sea.
Alavairthae! (Al-ah-VARE-thay, or “May your sk
their farewells.
--- col ---
ds, possess a native tongue. In addition, all humans and
Common grew from a kind of pidgin Chondathan and is
and less expressive. Nuances of speech, naming, and
anguages, since Common is little more than a trade
lence. Everybody in the Heartlands speaks Chondathan,
t the most esoteric conversations. Even in remote areas,
badly.
lest to assume that Common is English, and that
ages might be used to inform an accent or provide a
n letters of English, the hieroglyphs of Egypt, or
ere are alalogous written languages of symbol for
on), but they are not the same. Even though that is
ere consumers must be able to read elements, you
f the fantasy languages have been developed into
and phrases worked out for many of them).
y’s Common tongue as a spoken language. Though
ives as the alphabet of Common and many other
was adopted by sun elves, drow, and the other
arves seldom write on that which can perish
ve in stone. The lines in all Dethek characters are
side from spaces between words and slashes
part of the script is painted for contrast or
out in red while the rest of the text is colored
estial, and Infernal.
Forgotten Realms.
ularly between strangers of a different race or
uaintances, (i.e. we’ve greeted before—hence the
is annoyed, curt, or sarcastic, one usually just
).
elers in the Inner Sea lands say; “Olore to you, my
out the Realms.
your bottom dry. Parting of the pirates of the
kill prevail”) the Red Wizards of Thay, in giving
===== PAGE 15 =====
Amarast! (Ah-mah-RAST) Meaning “fare well un
Shining South.
Sweet water and light laughter until next. A fa
Aluve (Ah-LOO-veh) “I/we leave you” in Drow.
Axe high, friend. I go. Dwarven farewell.
Forges warm, friend. Gnomish farewell.
Good morning, and good day after that! Don’t
sometimes added) “Ware that Big Folk, and mind
other. To others, they usually say, “Gods smile! (u
Braeunk vhos trolkh! (If you die while I’m gone
addendum “because I wouldn’t want to miss the fu
Faerûnian Names
Faerûn is vast. Among humans alone, its inhabitan
names. Some folk have no surnames, others have a
“son/daughter of” appellation.
In Tharsult, Tashalar, and the Border Kingdoms,
blood of,” and denotes a famous ancestor—or false
“Baer sar Thardizar,” after the famous warlord of c
Older usages such as “of the” and the name of a t
Sammert o’ the Hollow) are falling out of favor and
most haughty adventurers use personal achieveme
Thunders or Belgaert of the Deadly Stand, and this
Occupations can be seen within names, however:
forar once meant traveler or peddler, helder was a
digger, and turnstone a miller. All are used as last n
Illuskans.
The names given here are by language, since are
names.
Aglarondan: Male: Aelthas, Courynn, Folcoerr, G
Blaera, Courynna, Lyn- neth, Maera, Mourna, Wydd
Jacerryl, Telstaerr, Uthelienn.
Alzhedo: Male: Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid, Khemed, M
Hama, Jasmal, Meilil, Seipora, Yasheira, Zasheida. S
Pashar, Rein.
Chessentan: Male: Aeron, Daelric, Eurid, Nicos, O
Ariadne, Cylla, Eriale, Halonya, Idriane, Mera, Num
Heldeion, Morieth, Nathos, Sphaerideion, Zora.
Chondathan: Male: Darvin, Dorn, Evendur, Gors
Female: Arveene, Esvele, Jhessail, Kerri, Lureene, M
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood, Gr
Chultan: Male: Atuar, Kwalu, Losi, Mezoar, Nsi, O
Isi, Lorit, Mainu, Sana, Tefnek. Surnames: None.
Damaran: Male: Bor, Fodel, Glar, Grigor, Igan, Iv
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana, Z
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag.
Dambrathan: Male: Aethelmed, Houn, Rhivaun,
Chourm, Glouris, Maeve, Hayaera, Sevaera, Xaemar
Mristar, Talaudrym, Wyndael
--- col ---
ntil next we meet,” a saying of the sailors of the
arewell used by elves.
t let anything curl your hair! (to which is
d the goblins too!” as the Halflings speak to each
upon you).”
e, do it quietly) Hobgoblin, with the unspoken
un.”
nts bear literally thousands upon thousands of
a common clan name, and others have a
, the word “sar” is much used. It means “of the
ely claimed ancestor—so that a farmer might be
centuries ago.
trade or place (such as Ruthrar o’ the Forge and
d are now rarely heard. Only wizards and the
ents in their names, such as Dastrin of the Three
s, too, is dying out.
: Tel is an old word for “works at” or “works with,”
a guard or warrior on patrol, turnskull was a
names among, primarily among Chondathans and
eas sharing a common tongue tend to use the same
Gaedynn, Mourgram, Sealmyd, Yuiredd. Female:
da. Surnames: Aengrilor, Dulsaer, Gel- ebraes,
Mehmen, Sudeiman, Zasheir. Female: Atala, Ceidil,
Surnames: Basha, Dumein, Jassan, Khalid, Mostana,
Oriseus, Pharaxes, Thersos, Xandos. Female:
mestra, Sinylla. Surnames: Aporos, Corynian,
stag, Grim, Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal, Stedd.
Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele. Sur- names:
reycas- tle, Tallstag.
Osaw, Selu, Weshtek. Female: Azuil, Chuil, Fipya,
vor, Kosef, Mival, Orel, Pavel, Sergor. Female:
Zora. Surnames: Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov,
Umbril, Waervyn, Xaemar, Zeltaebar. Female:
rra, Zraela. Surnames: Calaumystar, Lharaendo,
===== PAGE 16 =====
Durpari: Male: Charva, Duma, Hukir, Jama, Kilim
Bask, Erilet, Fanul, Hist, Mokat, Nismet, Ril, Tiket. S
Nalambar, Saqarastar, Tiliputakas.
Dwarven: Male: Barundar, Dorn, Joyin, Khondar
Dorna, Joylin, Kiira, Sambril, Tace, Umil. Surnames:
Skulldark, Stoneshield.
Elven: Male: Aravilar, Faelar, Mourn, Nym, Orlpa
Hacathra, Imizael, Jastra, Jhaumrithe, Quamara, Ta
Calaudra, Eveningfall, Laelithar, Moondown, Tarnr
Elven (Drow): Male: Alak, Drizzt, Ilmryn, Merini
Akordia, Chalithra, Eclavdra, Jhaelrnya, Nedylene,
Coloara, Glannath, Illistyn, Pharn, Seerear, Vrinn, X
Gnome: Male: Burgell, Colmarr, Dorgan, Falrinn,
Calanddra, Eriss, Iviss, Jaree, Lissa, Meree, Nathee,
Greatorm, Rivenstone, Tavartarr, Uvarkk, Whiteho
Halfling: Male: Blazanar, Corkaury, Dalabrac, Ha
Female: Aloniira, Calathra, Deldiira, Melinden, Olpa
Bramblefoot, Dardragon, Hardingdale, Merrymar,
Halruaan: Male: Aldym, Chand, Hostegym, Mele
Female: Aithe, Alaethe, Chalan, Oloma, Phaele, Sara
Gedreghost, Maurmeril, Stamaraster, Zorastryl.
Lantanese: Male: Eberc, Fodoric, Koger, Lambra
Avilda, Bersace, Charissa, Mel- sany, Phaerilda, Rav
Lamstrand, SeKorc, SeLangstra, SeMilderic.
Illuskan: Male: Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath, Geth, L
Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga, Silifrey
Hornraven, Lackman, Stonar, Stormwind, Windriv
Midani: Male: Ajaman, Alif, Assam, Bhadla, Daha
Kadumi, Musalim, Nata, Rahid, Rashad, Sa’ar, Sabk
Alethra, Bujauna, Dajala, Dizsa, Duthrala, Fiiriia, Ily
Rahalat, Ruha, Saalariira, Shalira, Tuibaila, Vayess,
Instead a Midani appellation is used or a matronym
“bint” (daughter of), “ibn” or “bin” (son of), the suf
(Rashad Al-Karji would translate into “the Rashad
Mulhorandi: Male: Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki, Keth
Female: Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara, Murithi, S
Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem, Sepret, Uuthr
Orc: Male: Besk, Durth, Fang, Gothog, Harl, Kesk,
Creske, Edarreske, Duvaega, Neske, Orvaega, Varra
Sormuzhik, Turnskull, Ulkrunnar, Zorgar.
Rashemi: Male: Borivik, Faurgar, Jandar, Kanitha
Female: Fyevarra, Hulmar- ra, Immith, Imzel, Nava
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara, Staya
Shaaran: Male: Awar, Cohis, Damota, Gewar, Hap
Anet, Bes, Dahvet, Faqem, Idim, Lenet, Moqem, Neg
Laumee Harr, Moq Qo Harr, Taw Harr, Woraw Tar
Tashalan: Male: Angwe, Dumai, Gharbei, Indo, M
Ayesha, Bhula, Lashela, Intin- gi, Mashai, Shevaya,
Ishivin, Jalamba, Konge, Maingwe, Wasatho.
--- col ---
mut, Oskut, Pradir, Rajaput, Sikhil. Female: Apret,
Surnames: Beszrizma, Datharathi, Melpurvatta,
r, Roryn, Storn, Thorik, Wulgar. Female: Belmara,
: Bladebite, Crownshield, Gor- drivver, Horn,
ar, Saevel, Respen, Rhistel, Taeghen. Female: Amra,
alindra, Vestele. Surnames: Amalith, Braegen,
ruth.
id, Pharaun, Rizzen, Tebryn, Zaknafein. Female:
Qilué, SiNafay, Vlondril. Surnames: Abaeir,
Xiltyn.
, Halbrinn, Orlamm, Rondell, Stolig. Female:
, Zelazadda. Surnames: Blackrock, Blimth,
orn.
alandar, Ombert, Roberc, Thiraury, Wilimac.
ara, Rosinden, Tara, Weninda. Surnames: Aumble,
Starnhap.
eghost, Presmer, Sandrue, Tethost, Uregaunt.
ade, Vosthyl. Surnames: Avhoste, Darants,
ac, Midoc, Norbert, Samber, Tibidoc. Female:
vace, Umbrasy. Surnames: Angalstrand, Decirc,
Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth. Female:
y, Westra. Surnames: Brightwood, Helder,
vver.
alzel, Dawasir, Didaji, Farim, Haushi, Kabina,
khat, Utaiba, Yatagan, Zarud. Female: Abal, Aglavia,
youma, Kalastiira, Lajarama, Nathla, Qoha’dar,
, Yamala. Surnames: Surnames are not used.
mic or patronymic: “abd” (slave of), “al” (the),
ffix “i” added to a location and preceded by “al”
from Karj.”)
hoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De, Urhur.
Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis. Surnames: Ankhalab,
rakt.
, Orrusk, Tharag, Thog, Ugurth. Female: Betharra,
a, Yeskarra. Surnames: Dummik, Horthor, Lammar,
ar, Madis- lak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak.
arra, Shevarra, Tammith, Yuldra. Surnames:
anoga, Ulmokina.
paw, Laskaw, Moktar, Senesaw, Tokhis. Female:
ghet, Sihvet. Surnames: Cor Marak, Hiaw Harr,
rak.
Masambe, Morife, Ngongwe, Sepoto. Female:
Shesara, Ushula. Surnames: Damarthe, Ghomposo,
===== PAGE 17 =====
Turmic: Male: Anton, Diero, Marcon, Pieron, Rim
Dona, Faila, Jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise, Von
Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo.
Uluik: Male: Aklar, Hilur, Liruk, Namiir, Selmik, U
Kagiik, Lelchik, Nirval, Talchuk, Valiir, Wenvik. Sur
Untheric: Male: Azzedar, Chadrezzan, Gibbur, Ho
Chadra, Ilzza, Jezzara, Marune, Saldashune, Xuthra
preferred.
Fantasy Arabia and Arabic
The Forgotten Realms has three distinct areas that act as f
Zakhara. Anauroch is a sandy land of desert nomads. Calim
elements of the Ottoman Turks as well as fantasy Arabia. Z
Both the people of Anauroch and Zakhara speak Midani
not use surnames; they use follow-on descriptions to clari
they have names that include Arabic-like structures such a
Bayzed Ibn Kull Al-Fallah would therefor mean “Bayzed, so
Calishites speak Alzhedo. This is a language related to Au
elemental air that blends elements of Arabic, Turkish, and
surnames.
Fantasy Asia and Asian Languages
The Forgotten Realms has multiple fantasy versions of var
world history. There are two places like China, two like Jap
When drawing from a real-world Asian culture, be sure
to the right place. T’u Lung does not produce samurai. A p
Location Adjectives
The adjective used for the citizens (and products)
formulation as described below.
Aglarond Aglarondan
Amn Amnian
Anauroch Anaurian
Arabel Arabellan
Archendale Arkhen
Arrabar Arrabarran
Aryvandaar Aryvandaaran
Athkatla Athkatlan
Baldur’s Gate Baldurian
Berdusk Berduskan
Calaunt Calauntan
Calimshan Calishite
Carradoon Carradden
Ched Nasad Ched Nasadan
Chondath Chondathan
Chult Chultan
Citadel Adbar Adbarrim
Citadel Felbarr Felbarran
Citadel of the Raven Ravenar
--- col ---
mardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero. Female: Balama,
nda. Surnames: Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine,
Uknar, Tirmuk, Wariik. Female: Chamuk, Iirkik,
rnames: None.
orat, Kassur, Numer, Samar, Ungred. Female:
a, Zeldara. Surnames: Seldom used, patronymics
fantastical Arabian settings: Anauroch, Calimshan, and
mshan is a vast land of distinct city-states that has
Zakhara is a continent’s worth of Arabian Nights fantasy.
i, a language that is virtually identical to Arabic. They do
ify differences between people with the same name. Thus
as “bint” (daughter of), “ibn” (“son of”), and “al” (the).
on of Kull the Fortunate.”
uran, the tongue of djinn and other creatures of
d fantasy. It does not use Arabic structures. People have
rious locations and cultures in Asia at various points in
pan, two like Korea. There’s a Tibet, an India, and more.
you’re ascribing the right cultural and language trappings
person from Koryo would not have a Japanese name.
of various locations often has a unique
Cormanthor Cormanthorian
Cormanthyr Cormanthyran
Cormyr Cormyrean
Daerlun Daerlunian
The Dalelands Dalesman/Dalesmen
(male), Dalesfolk (male or
female)
Damara Damaran
Dwarf Dwarvish (the language),
Dwarven (stuff)
Elf Elvish (the language),
Elven (stuff)
Elturel Elturian
Elversult Elversian
Eryndlyn Eryndlyrr
Eveningstar Evenor
Evermeet Evermeetian
Faerûn Faerûnian
Hillsfar Hillsfarian
===== PAGE 18 =====
Hulburg Hulburgan
Imaskar Imaskaran (stuff),
Imaskari (people)
Immersea Immersean
Impiltur Impilturian
Innarlith Innarlan
Iriaebor Iriaeben
Kozakura Kozakuran
Lantan Lantanna
Lorosfyr Lorosfyran
Luskan Luskar
Marsember Marsembian
Maztica Maztican
Melvaunt Melvauntian
Menzoberranzan Menzoberranyr
Mintarn Tarnian
Mirabar Mirabarran
Mulhorand Mulhorandi
Mulmaster Mulman (stuff),
Mulmasterite (people)
Myth Drannor Myth Drannan
Narfell Nar
Nesmé Nesmian
Neverwinter Neveren (stuff),
Neverwintan (people)
Nimbral Nimbrian (stuff), Nimbran
(people)
Ordulin Ordulan (stuff), Ordulian
(people)
Palishchuck Palishchukian(s)
Phlan Phlanite
Procampur Procampan
Proskur Proskurian
Rashemen Rashemi
Raumathar Raumatharii
Ruathym Ruathan
Help us add to this list! If you find a reference to place nom
making one up, please let us know.
Coin
Barter and coinage of all sorts are common in the R
their own money. Thus coins from different places
purposes, a coin is worth the same regardless of its
Note that people don’t use the word “money” in t
Coinage throughout the realms is customarily va
10 copper pieces = 1 silver piece
10 silver pieces = 1 gold piece
10 gold pieces = 1 platinum piece
Some places have minted electrum coins but the
in the U.S.).
--- col ---
Saerloon Searloonian
Scornubel Scornubian
Selgaunt Selgite (stuff), Selgauntan
(people)
Sembia Sembian
Shaar Shaaran (stuff and
language), Shaaryan
(tribes and people)
Shade Enclave Shadovar
Shadowdale Grimmar (people),
Grimmen (stuff)
Shou Lung Shou
Sildéyuir Sildéyuiren
Sossal Sossar (stuff), Sossrim
(people)
Sundabar Sundabarian
Suzail Suzailan
Tantras Tantran
Tashluta Tashlutar
Tethyr Tethyrian
Thay Thayan T
hesk Theskian
Tilverton Tilverian
Turmish Turmishan
Unther Untherite
Urmlaspyr Urmlassan
Vaasa Vaasan
Waterdeep Waterdhavian
Yhaunn Yhauntan
Yûlash Yûlashi
Zhentil Keep Zhent (people), Zhentish
(stuff)
Zentarim Zhentarian (stuff),
Zhentilar (people;
soldiers)
menclature in any of the source material, or find yourself
Realms, and most countries and city-states mint
s have different shapes and decoration. For most
ts point of origin.
the Frogotten Realms. They saiy “coin” instead.
alued as follows:
ey are uncommon (like encountering dollar coins
===== PAGE 19 =====
2 electrum pieces = 1 gold piece
Coinage in Cormyr
The favored manner of currency in Cormyr is the royal coin
and a treasury date mark on the other (the penalty for cou
death). There is no paper currency save for I.O.U.s which a
blood by both (or all, if more than two) parties involved, a
seal.
In Cormyr, coinage terminology is as follows:
copper pieces = copper thumbs
silver pieces = silver falcons
electrum pieces = blue eyes
gold pieces = golden lions
platinum pieces = tricrown
Other Currency
Many nations and people use forms of money uniq
have less real value in gold than they represent (ju
great). They are typically backed by a local govern
and often they have no value outside their localitie
Bela. A word for paper money that refers both to
recent script issued by the over-chief or khan of th
worthless, and occasionally offered as an insult.
Blood Notes. Scrolls, letters, or other carvings re
listed person to the holder of the note. Blood notes
countries and cities to cover debts, and should the
to pay when it is presented. Blood notes from indiv
Trade Bar, Mirabar. Coming from the wild coun
made of black iron and shaped like rectangular spi
gp in the rest of the Realms.
Trade Bar, Merchant’s. A thin, silver bar worth
one end with its value, at the other with the symbo
created it. Broken trade bars are valueless, though
bars of defunct institutions.
The trade bars of the Iron Throne trading group
as this group is considered disreputable. Merchant
an increasing number of them bear the mint mark
Trade Bar, Sembian. Ingot-shaped bars of silve
symbol of Sembia, these trade bars are considered
Merchant Kingdom. They are most often made in 1
Trade Bar, Lantan. A flat, envelope-shaped bar
Gond, such bars are worth 20 gp each and are used
regions where the Lantanese normally trade.
Toal, Waterdeep. A square brass coin with a ho
of Splendors. In Waterdeep, it has a value similar t
worthless in places distant from the city.
Harbor Moon, Waterdeep. A special Waterdhav
platinum and inset with electrum. It is used in bulk
gp each. In lands distant from Waterdeep, its value
--- col ---
nage of the Court, stamped with a dragon on one side,
unterfeiting in Cormyr, and most other similar nations, is
are known as “blood-notes,” as they must be signed in
and taken to the local Lord for the affixing of the royal
que to their locality. Often these forms of money
ust as the value of the paper in a dollar is not
nment or accepted as valuable by local custom,
es.
o bills used in the lands of Kara-Tur and more
he tribes of the Horde. In the western Realms, it is
epresenting IOUs and promissory notes from the
s can be made by individuals, companies, or
e debtor still be around, they are legally obligated
viduals who are no longer alive are not binding.
ntry north of Waterdeep, these trade bars are
indels. They are worth 10 gp in Mirabar itself, 5
h either 10, 20, or 50 gp each. The bar is marked at
ol of the trading institution or caster which
h most merchants will continue to honor the trade
are not honored by other trading organizations,
ts’ trade bars can be manufactured anywhere, but
of Baldur’s Gate.
er dotted with copper and marked with the
d face value and backed up by the money of the
10, 25, and 50 gp values.
of worked steel marked with the great wheel of
d primarily along the Sword Coast and in other
ole bored in the center, commonly used in the City
to one electrum piece, but is considered nearly
vian coin in the shape of a cresent, made of
k purchases in Waterdeep, where it is worth 50
e drops to 2 gp per harbor moon.
===== PAGE 20 =====
Steelpense, Sembian. A coin introduced by the
government could then horde) the coin was overp
value is 1 steelpense = 1 copper piece. The Sembia
honor it grudgingly throughout the country.
Shou Lung Trade Bars. A slender bar of silver, d
its way to the West with the occasional trader. Sho
Tharsult Statues. Far to the south, the nation of
statues of ivory, jade, and serpentine are used as c
heartlands of the Realms as curios. Typical statues
each in their native land.
Shaar Rings. The plainsmen of the Shaar use rin
strings. Rings will be found in bundles, and each ri
Gond Bells. An odd form of money introduced b
particular in trade between worshippers of Gond.
almost totally enclose a loose ornamental stone wh
gp on the open market, 20 gp if traded to a church
Adamantite and Mithral
There are two special metals in the Forgotten Real
Adamantite. If you want a super hard metal, use
Adamant and other metals. Usually black in color, a
by candlelight or a purple-white sheen when view
strong and hard. Weapons made from it can cut th
impenetrable.
Mithral. If you want a super light metal, use mith
out of mithral weight half as much as similar items
of mithral are very light, therefore they allow the w
and are less restrictive on the spellcasting.
Gems of the Realms
Faerûn has all the ornamental stones and precious
with the addition of the following special types.
Rogue Stone. Rogue stone is a small magical gem
slowly swirling iridescently, when exposed to sunl
other like magnets.
King’s Tears. King's Tears are sometimes called
transparent teardrop-shaped stones with a smooth
physical force. Folklore suggests these stones are t
kings. In each jewel can be seen that which the wee
Beljuril. Beljuril is a deep seawater green and al
human fist and not quite spherical. About once eve
will absorb an undetectable amount of energy from
energy as a flash of sparkling light without heat, so
easily noticeable when the ambient light is dim (ca
dazzling to the eye. Beljurils are very difficult to cu
They are sometimes claw-mounted to shoulder-pla
lighting or beacons by the wealthy.
--- col ---
Sembian government to replace silver (which the
produced and dropped in value until its present
an nobles have disavowed the coin’s value, but still
definitely Kara-Turran in origin, which has made
ou Lung trade bars are worth about 40 gp each.
f Tharsult uses small art objects in trade. These
oinage in that region, and have reached the
s are worth 15 gp each in the North, but only 5 gp
ngs made of sliced and bored ivory, hung on long
ing will be worth 3 gp each.
by the Lantanese and used in areas of the North, in
The small Gond bells are made of brass and
hich causes it to clatter. Gond bells are worth 10
of Gond.
lms.
e adamantite. Adamantite is a jet-black alloy of
adamantite will have a green sheen when viewed
wed by magical light. Adamantite is incredibly
hrough weaker metals. Armor made from it is nigh
hral. Mithral is a silvery-white metal. Items made
s made of steel. Pieces of armor made mostly out
wearer to make better use of their natural agility
s and semi-precious gems you’d find on Earth
mstone whose rainbow colors shift as if in liquid,
light. They are extremely rare and repel each
d frozen tears, or lich weepings. They are
h surface and are seemingly unbreakable by
the crystallized tears of long-dead necromancer
eping king loved ages ago.
ll known specimens are roughly the size of a
ery hour (rates vary from stone to stone) a beljuril
m within a thirty foot radius and re-emit that
ound, or electrical discharge. The light produced is
andlelight or lantern light) and in the dark it is
ut with metal tools and the stone is very durable.
ates or worn in a pectoral, or used as decorative
===== PAGE 21 =====
Amartha. Amaratha is also known as shieldston
strata, amaratha is soft and yields greenish white t
jewelry or any setting where it is protected from d
electricity in a ten foot radius, protecting all within
amaratha could absorb a natural or magical lightni
Jasmal. Jasmal is a durable, very hard gemstone
larger seam deposits in the Thunder Peaks and the
cutting edge and can even be worked into small no
sunlight or torchlight and, although themselves rem
of amber light.
Bloodstone. Bloodstones in the Realms come fro
export of this region, hence their being known as t
Laeral's Tears. The Realms name for beryllonite
Star Metal. The name in the Realms for a meteor
weapons of great strength.
Celestial Bodies
The Sun is called the Sun. The Moon is called Selûn
Sea of Night and instead of one Milky Way, there ar
called Selune's Veil or the Tearfall Veil (a reference
Selûne and Selûne’s Tears
Toril’s moon is known as Selûne. While Selûne in t
at arm’s length, it is a world in its own right, easily
enough to cast pale shadows when full. It is accom
number of smaller luminaries that spread across th
Selûne is of course associated with the goddess o
light, stars, and navigation. Whether the moon is n
thought by some to reside in the moon or that the
Eclipses. Selûne’s orbit around Toril is almost in
solar and lunar eclipses are frequent. Solar eclipse
seen during totality) and almost never partial, beca
on Selûne are quite large. Eclipses are thus spectac
particular land do not always notice such eclipses,
wander across the calendar. Solar eclipses might b
quickly return to sleep once daylight returns.
Selûne’s Phases. Selûne is full at exactly midnig
days, ten hours, and thirty minutes thereafter. The
technically speaking, one synodic month, the time
next. Selûne makes exactly forty-eight synodic rev
Selûne is full at exactly midnight on the first day of
calendar day four years forward or backward in tim
One Faerûnian holiday, the Feast of the Moon, is
on or about that day. Because Selûne’s synodic per
month, Selûne is full around the first day of each m
The annual festival days serve to correct discrepan
with Shieldmeet providing a necessary correction
sliding deep into each month.
--- col ---
ne. Found as small lumps or nodules in deep rock
to pale green gemstones that can be set into body
damage or wear. Shieldstone attracts and absorbs
n this area until it vaporizes. A large quantity of
ing bolt.
found in the form of small veins or (very rarely)
e Spine of the World. It is so hard that it can hold a
onmetallic weapons. When polished, jasmals catch
maining transparent and colorless, give off halos
om the Vaasa/Damara area, and are the chief
the Bloodstone Lands.
e. Named after the sorceress Laeral Silverhand.
rite; forged with common metals to make durable
ne and the Moon. The night sky is known as the
re several “rivers of stars.” The aurora borealis is
e to Selune's Tears).
the sky appears no larger than a human hand held
y two thousand miles across. Selûne is bright
mpanied in the sky by the Tears of Selûne, a
he sky in a great arc trailing the moon.
of the moon, Selûne, worshipped as a goddess of
named for her or vice versa is unknown. She is
moon itself is the goddess.
n the same plane as Toril’s orbit around its sun, so
es are never annular (the sun’s edge cannot be
ause Selûne’s shadow on Toril and Toril’s shadow
cular but rather commonplace. Inhabitants of any
, since the rising and setting times for Selûne
briefly cause nocturnal beings to awaken, but they
ght, the first of Hammer, 1372 DR, and every thirty
e time between successive full moons is,
from one Sun–Toril–Selûne conjunction to the
volutions every four calendar years on Toril. Thus,
f every leap year, and has the same phase on any
me.
held during a full moon that obligingly shows up
riod is so close to the actual length of the calendar
month or on festival days, give or take a day or so.
ncies between the synodic and calendar months,
every fourth year to keep the full moon from
===== PAGE 22 =====
Tears of Selûne. The Tears of Selûne are a collec
celestial bodies (asteroids) that orbit Toril in Selûn
Trojan point, meaning that they do not stay in plac
whirlpool fashion. The Tears are visible as points o
their actual shapes.
The individual orbits of the Tears are not exactly
they are close. As a result, their appearance in the
bright “stars,” trailing Selûne by sixty degrees acro
average human can cover Selûne’s image with his c
appear to span an area of the night sky almost thre
at arm’s length. The relative positions of individua
their common center.
The Tears are not bright enough to be seen durin
Tears are bright even when Selûne is new, they are
too have rising and setting times, and thus might n
about four hours after Selûne does. Because it is so
hours to rise or set, from first Tear to last. The com
shadows at night.
Important Stars
For centuries, astrologers have observed the appea
close to sunrise and right after sunset. Anadia and
Heralds, although they might just as easily be calle
Deeper in the Sea of Night roam the Five Wande
path across the sky as the other stars do. These Wa
rivers through which they roam; they tend to be la
Karpri, the nearest, is a sapphire orb with great w
a brown-green smudge whose markings change od
gray, but surrounded by a spectacular ring and thr
Garden is a tiny green sparkle, rarely seen. The las
The King-Killer Star is a red star (a comet) that
sky due to ancient elven magic.
Color Spray is a pinkish star visible primarily du
with the naked eye, but a telescope allows one to s
after the spell. Similarly, the Galleon is a bluish sta
ship. It is visible during the autumn and early wint
Constellations
There are a number of constellations of note in the
culture. The constellations’ most common names a
visible all year round. Note that the constellations
course, different.
Mystra’s Star Circle (all year). North is marked
utter darkness between them, which is known to m
floating Castle of Night, in childrens’ fairytales, is s
north is marked by the brightest “Brow Star,” calle
sorceress who is said to have challenged the gods l
--- col ---
ction of hundreds of very small but bright
ne’s wake. The Tears act like any such bodies in a
ce but actually orbit around a common center in
of light like stars, too small for viewers to discern
y coplanar with the orbit of Toril and Selûne, but
night sky of Toril is that of a flattened ellipse of
oss the sky, along the ecliptic. Typically, an
clenched fist at arm’s length; the Tears, however,
ee handspans wide and about three fingers deep
al Tears change from night to night as they orbit
ng the day, though Selûne often is. Though the
e not always visible in the night sky, since they
not be up at night. The first Tear rises or sets
o long, the full set of Tears takes about three
mbined effect of the Tears is not enough to cast
arance of one or two particularly bright stars
d Coliar are sometimes known as the Dawn
ed the Evening Heralds too.
erers, inconstant stars that do not follow a yearly
anderers are markedly different from the star-
arger, brighter, and show wondrous colors.
whitecaps at top and bottom. Chandos, the next, is
ddly over a few nights’ watching. Glyth is a dull
ree lesser bodies, visible only with magical aid.
st, H’Catha is a gleam of diamond white.
t provokes dragons to rage when it appears in the
uring the spring and early summer. When seen
see it as a rainbow triangle, hence it being named
ar that under magnification looks something like
ter and thus is called by many Auril’s Ship.
e northern hemisphere. Their names differ by
are given below. Not all of the constellations are
visible from the southern hemisphere are, of
d by an awesome circle of large, bright stars with
most folk today as Mystra’s Star Circle (her
said to float in the center of the darkness). Due
ed Alagairtha by the Bedine, after a proud Bedine
long, long ago, and been imprisoned in the
===== PAGE 23 =====
heavens as a punishment: to preserve her breathta
Other folk in the Realms call this constellation the
People born under these stars (those who fall in
said to be inquisitive, with a strong ability to learn
magic are said to be linked to these stars.
Auroth (Winter). Down low, running horizonta
stars that join two larger, brighter star clusters, the
Knotted Tail (to the east). This is Auroth, the Ice Sn
Dragon by the elves. Said to be a beloved and faith
shield Auril in a long-ago battle among the gods. Fr
come Auril’s messages, to clergy of Auril who pray
People born under these stars are said to have a
in a fierce anger. Some wizards and people who liv
these stars.
Elfmaid’s Tears (Winter). The Elfmaid’s tears a
northern hemisphere but are considered a winter
vertical lines of blue-white stars, of unequal length
Moonbow, wept when Lolth and the drow turned u
People born under these stars are said to be sens
hearts or remain open to many emotional wounds
The Frostqueen’s Throne (Winter). In the dep
Throne (also called the Seat of Winter or simply Au
white stars presents the profile of a chair. Although
beseech Auril herself so long as Auroth remains in
southerly lands see the shape not as a chair but as
King’s Crown, with legends ascribing it to various r
People born under this star are thought to be int
their own thoughts most of the time.
Jassa’s Dagger (Winter). Jassa’s Dagger (said to
Queen Jassa of the city of Lirremar, long ago, after
Serpents) is a dagger-shaped constellation: a line o
large and pink, and that is crossed two stars lower
It hangs in the sky below and east of the Sleepless
diagonal line pointing southwest, down and away
People born under these stars are said to have p
or accomplishments. They are also known to hold
out on personal vendettas can be linked to these st
Sleepless Knights (Spring). Not far south of My
middling-brightness stars arranged just like the fiv
Sleepless Knights, also known as the Watchful Knig
oathbound to keep watch on the landscape of the N
a long-dead king. It’s said they “rode into the sky” (
blinding, late-season blizzard) but somehow never
People born under these stars are said to be extr
Some knights and paladins can find themselves lin
The Arrows of the Gods (Spring). The Arrows
of stars, each with a cluster of stars at its outward
together points east. To folk elsewhere in the Realm
Sun’s Signpost, or the Caltrop.
--- col ---
aking beauty, but keep her forever from men).
Crown of the North, or just the “Cold Crown.”
the gaps between the other contellations) are
n. Those who pursue the academics, arts, and
al close to the horizon, is a zigzag line of seventeen
e Head or Jaws (to the west) and the Tailknot or
nake of Auril, or “Old Icefangs,” also called White
hful steed of the goddess who sacrificed himself to
rom particular twinkling stars of Auroth’s body
y to those specific stars.
cold, calm demeanor, but are capable in erupting
ve a mercenary life find themselves linked to
are visible near Mystra’s Star Circle in the
constellation when they are “up.” Formed of two
h, they are said to be the tears of Sehanine
upon the rest of elfkind.
sitive souls who must build up walls around their
s.
pths of winter in the North the Frostqueen’s
uril Frostqueen) rises. This constellation of bright
h holy to those devoted to Auril, they dare not
n the sky to answer their prayers. People in more
a profile of a crown and know it instead as the
rulers with heroic or tragic stories.
telligent and incisive but distant and absorbed by
o have been hurled into the heavens by the dying
she was impaled on a spear at the Battle of Biting
of six stars whose highest star (the Pommel) is
r by a cross-line of four fainter stars (the Guards).
Knights, hilt uppermost and blade forming a
from the Watchful Knights.
pride, whether it be in their positions, possessions,
a grudge. Ambitious people and those who set
tars.
ystra’s Star Circle, there’s a distinctive cluster of
ve pips on the “5” side of a d6. These are the
ghts. They are thought to be five knights
North for approaching armies of foes, on behalf of
(off a cliff on a perilous mountain trail, in a
r fell.
remely reliable and loyal to their friends and duty.
nked to these stars.
of the Gods are formed of three converging lines
end, or “point.” Where the three lines come
ms, these stars are called the Atar's Arrows, the
===== PAGE 24 =====
People who are born under these stars are said t
worse. They tend to be driven and tackle their goa
Independent and headstrong people tend to be lin
Lavarandar’s Lantern (Spring). Lavarandar’s L
rectangle of stars enclosing four very bright blue-w
Mystra’s Star Circle and West of the Watchful Knig
be four sisters, who were regretfully imprisoned b
lycanthropes. Later, an evil nephew plunged the ca
crown, but this enraged Umberlee, and the goddes
too far, so it soared up into the Sea of Night and sta
People born under these stars are said to be com
demeanor when facing their own problems. Some
themselves can be linked to these stars.
The Scimitar (Summer). Roughly opposite in th
cluster followed by a curving tail of stars. The scim
summer. It is said by many in the North to be the s
constellation to the north and later in the season.
To the Bedine, this is the Serpent of the Sands, U
believe that this creature is wild and amoral, older
trees, and grasses to create the desert, leaving only
sky, most Bedine believe, means that the desert wi
way across the world. In Tunland, Cormyr, Iriaebo
respectively as Faeraula, the Sword of the South, th
People born under this star are thought to be rul
Amaunator’s Belt (Summer). This line of six ye
far north during summer. When Amaunator was th
failed to buckle in his haste to go to the battle in w
People born under these stars are said to be brav
Eyes of the Watching Woman (Summer). The
which appear as two side-by-side crescents or arcs
Eyes of the Watching Woman, while to the Bedine
People born under these stars are said to be high
Those who have a very charismatic aura about the
to be linked to these stars.
The Unicorn (Autumn). This constellation mark
bright stars and thought to make a horse head with
many different names. The elves call it Correlian an
Many humans of the North call it Mielikki and see i
Eachthighern, the mysterious lord of unicorns and
Folk born under this constellation are said to pos
people’s emotions and changes in the weather.
The Gate (Autumn). Called Esetar by the elves,
celestial gate from which Dendar, the Night Serpen
The people of Chult believe Dendar will emerge fro
they instead call it the Cage and think of it as a pris
appears as a rectangle formed from lines of dim sta
People born under this constellation are thought
prescient dreams.
Shard of Selûne (Autumn). This diamond-shap
autumn’s end. It’s thought to be a part of Selûne cu
--- col ---
to have a very blunt personality for better or
als and obstacles as directly as possible.
nked to these stars.
Lantern (also known as “the Lamp”) is an upright
white stars, in the northern sky far south of
ghts. Along the Sword Coast, they are thought to
by the king their father when they became
age into the sea to drown them, and so inherit the
ss hurled the cage up out of the watery depths, but
ayed there, as it does to this day.
mpassionate of others, but keep a stalwart
clerics and people who put others ahead of
he sky from Auroth, the Scimitar is a bright starry
mitar cuts its way across the sky throughout
sword fallen from Amaunator’s Belt, a
Urwath, “The Swallower.” The desert nomads
r than the gods, and that it swallows mountains,
y sand in its wake. Its presence in the southern
ill continually expand southward, as it eats its
or, and Westgate, however, it is recognized
he Southfires, and the “Dangers of the Desert.”
led by their passions, particularly lust and anger.
ellow-white stars appears high in the sky in the
hought dead, it was said to be the sword belt he
which he died.
ve but rash.
Eyes are two “fuzzy” clusters of blue-white stars,
s in the sky, points downward. To most, these are
they are the Two Jambiyas.
hly sociable and the most adaptable to change.
em and people who survive great events are said
ks the end of summer. It is made of a number of
h a point for the tip of a unicorn’s horn. It has
nd think of it as Correlon Larethian’s mount.
it as a symbol of that goddess. Others name it
d pegasi.
ssess quiet strength and to be good at sensing
this constellation is thought by many to be the
nt, with someday emerge to devour the world.
om beneath mountain in their jungle land and
son in which the gods hurl the most evil souls. It
ars.
t to be patient, deep thinkers who are able to have
ped constellation of many stars is highest toward
ut from her in the ancient battle between Selûne
===== PAGE 25 =====
and her divine sister, Shar. The wound was so grea
say it was this wound that made the Tears of Selûn
People born when this constellation is high are s
conflicted natures. It’s considered an ominous ome
because it is thought that the siblings will become
Forgotten Realms Terms
Banned Words
a.m.
coffee (should be “kaeth” or “kaethae”)
money (should be “coin”)
restaurant (should be “feasting hall,” or more
formally as “skaethar”)
week (should be “tenday”)
high elf (refer to the Forgotten Realms subraces)
hill dwarf (should be “shield dwarf”)
hourglass (should be “sandglass”)
mountain dwarf (should be “gold dwarf”)
o’clock (should be “bells” but most people don’t
reference time so specifically)
p.m.
aba (a loose, long shirt or tunic, which often has long
sleeves; worn by the Bedine)
Abeir
Abeir-Toril
Abyss, the
Academy, the (in Menzoberranzan)
aearee
afterdaze
Aillesel Seldarie. (“Sledarine preserve us.” In Elvish.)
alaé (Elvish greeting)
alu Tel’Quessir (“water elf” in Elvish)
alu’dala (“water battle” in Elvish)
ar Tel’Quessir (“gold or sun elf” in Elvish)
arael (“heart” in Elvish)
arael’lia (“heart oak” in Elvish)
arael’sha (“heart friend” in Elvish)
arael’vae (“heart son” in Elvish)
Araumycos
archdevil
arms-captain
arms-major
arselu’tel’quess (“high magic” in Elvish)
Art, the (magic, spellcasting)
Astral Sea, the
audience chamber (pref. over throne room)
authokh (coin)
bae’qeshel telphraezzar (aka the bae’qeshel, or the
Whisperers of the Dark. Drow bards.)
baneblade
--- col ---
at it made a bright scar upon Shar as well. Some
ne.
said to be mercurial and have conflicting and
en when twins are born under these stars
bitter rivals.
barrow gold
barrow spirit
batrachi
battle-mistress
battlerager
beast-men: ogres (formerly used only by humans,
now by gnomes and halflings, too)
belbolt (coin)
beljuril (gemstone)
Binding, the
birdpipe (a set of pan pipes)
blacklung fever (disease)
blackroot (poison)
blacktongue (disease)
bladedance
bloodbeak (bird)
bloodfly (pl. bloodflies)
bloodpurge (medicine)
bloodstaunch (medicine)
bloodwood (tree)
blueleaf (a drug; also a tree)
brainworm
Bregan D’aerthe
broodmate
brittle bones: humans (used only by orcs)
broken bones: wounded, defeated, slaves or those
too weak to defend themselves or to be worthy of
attention. (Used of all races, including their own, but
only by orcs)
burlbush(es) (flower)
Castellan’s Guard (Zhentil Keep)
cavefly (pl. caveflies)
Change, the
changelands (a piece of terrain that clearly doesn't
fit in with the surrounding terrain, and therefore was
likely caused by the Spellplague way back when)
Chosen, the
circle, the (of high mages)
clearstone
cloudwrack
coin (not money)
coronal
Corpsehaven
crysstone
===== PAGE 26 =====
culler
dala (“battle” in Elvish)
daggerhedge (bush)
dark bolt
Dark Mother
darkblade (mercenary lacking principals)
darkblossom (bush)
darkenbeast
darkhall
darkrot (disease)
Darksong Knight
darkstone crystal(s)
darksword
dead-disk (phaerimm)
deadwall
Deep, the (or Shadow Deep, the)
deepbear
deepnight (midnight)
demon-boar
Disciples of Phelthong
Dome of the Stars, the (council chamber of
Evermeet)
downland (southern Cormyr)
dracophoenix
dragon scales (protection spell)
dragon’s-teeth (game)
durthan (the evil wychlaran)
duskwood (tree)
dragonbone (made of the bones of a dragon)
dragonkind
Dwarvish (the language)
earth node (also “nodes”)
earthmote (not earthberg or earth-mote)
Eilistraeen (worshiper of Eilistraee)
Eldest (Evermeet)
el’tael (Elvish for a master of the bladesinging art,
singular and plural)
Elemental Chaos,
the elfkin
elflord
elf maid
elfroad
elfsong
elven lodge
Elvish (the language)
Ereilir Vor (Plains of Soulfire, Demonweb Pits)
evenfeast (can replace “dinner”)
eyehead (epithet for beholder) Faerie
evermead (a mead crafted only in Evermeet)
faerielight
Faerûn (continent, “everywhere in Faerûn”, not “on
Faerûn.”)
Faerzress
--- col ---
Fair Folk, the: elves
fairlady
Fane of Shadow (temple on Shade Enclave)
Far Realm, the
featherlung (plague/disease)
featherwood (tree)
felsul (tree)
felthane
festhall (syn. Brothel and gambling place)
fey gates
fey mounds
fey sites
Feywild, the
fingertalk (sign language of thieves, not drow, see
also “handcant”)
fire-blast (n.)
First Hilt (leader of the bladesingers)
First-Speaker (leader of the Cult of the Dragon)
flakefungus
fleshmason
fleshwort (medicine)
forestmote freefolk
Free Folk, the: satyrs (a human term now used by all
races, including satyrs)
Fringe, the (aka Shadow Fringe, the)
GatherStone (phaerimm term)
Gauntlgrym
gentlesir
ghazneth
Ghazneth Scourge
glaur (a short, flared, and curved horn which
resembles a cornucopia, and is fitted with valves
[those without valves are known as gloons])
gloryhouse
glowball
glowstone
godsforsaken (replaces Godforsaken)
gold (not money)
Goodman/Goodwoman (a title or form of address,
usu. capped)
goodsir (a form of address, not capped)
grand mage (title, Evermeet)
graycloth guildhouse
Gutbuster Brigade
hamach (n.)
Hamarfae
hand drum (s double-headed drum)
handcant (thieves’ sign language, see also
“fingertalk”)
Harper (member of organization)
Harpers, the (name of organization)
hathran (one of the leaders of the sisterhood of the
wychlaran)
===== PAGE 27 =====
heartstop (use in place of “heart attack”)
Hells (also, the Nine Hells)
hellsteed (aka nightmare)
Hidden One’s Gift,
the high loregem
High Council,
the high mage
high magic
highsun (noon)
Hill Elder (Evermeet, Evereska)
hillmote
hiresword
hin: halflings (informal but polite; everyday usage
among halflings)
homeagain (greeting: “Glad homeagain, Joe.”)
honeyvine (flower)
House (i.e.: You are a member of a noble House.)
House Unnamed
Hulorn (Lord Mayor of Selgaunt)
hurbryn: humans (a satyr and dryad term meaning
“heavy-footed ones,” now used by halflings and
creeping into usage by other races)
ildva (the bond between the wychlaran and the
vremyonni)
Infiernadex of Aesperus (book)
iqua Tel`Quessir
lanceboard (chess-like game)
kaer’vaelen (“First Hilt of the bladesingers” in Elvish)
Khazid’hea (Cattie-brie’s former sword)
lady’s promise (flower)
laspar (tree)
LastHome, the (aka Evereska)
Leaves of One Night, The (ancient religious text,
Shar)
leShay
lia (“oak” in Elvish)
Lolth
Lolthite (derogatory)
Long Watch, the (Evereska guard)
longbarb (aged phaerimm)
longhorn (a Faerûn flute)
loregem
lorestone
mage rune
marchion
magecraft (noun)
magelight
magelord
magesight
Manyhanded, the: humans (derived from “The
Manyhanded Curse,” an old elf insult about humans)
marsh fever (disease)
Master of Melee-Magthere
--- col ---
Master of Sorcere
Melting, the
menhirs
meat: all intelligent prey (used only by orcs)
middark
mind mage
Mighty, the: orcs (used only by orcs, to speak of their
race)
mindwine (narcotic wine)
mintwater
misthead (mistleaf addict)
mistleaf (drug)
morningfeast (in place of breakfast)
Most High, the
murdath
myrmidar (ancient Netherese warrior)
mythaalnirr darach (Elvish, spell of mythal-shaping)
mythal
mythalcraft
mythal force
mythal-shaping
mythal stone
mythal trap
mythal-weave
mythallar (Netheril)
n Tel’Quessir (“not People” in Elvish, meaning a non-
elf)
Nine Hells
Nightshadow
Nightstar
noble fey, the
orc hold
orcling (young or small orc)
orcspawn (syn. half-orc)
orcswill (orc wine or beer, or a lie)
oroosh: humans (used by treants, this literally means
“never-stopping talkers”)
othlor (the elite among the hathran, othlor means
“true one”)
pack lizard
Palace Most High (on Shade Enclave)
paleblood
paleblooded
peeptalk (language of birds)
People, the: elves (used only by elves)
phaerimm (pl.: phaerimm, not phaerimms)
piwafwi
plaguechanged (someone who has been changed by
spellplague to a monstrous extent)
plaguelands (lands that still hold pockets of
spellplague)
Plaguewrought Land, the (a particular place on the
map that is riddled with spellplague)
===== PAGE 28 =====
portal-stone
post-tower
prairiemote
probiter
Proud Peoples, the: dwarves and elves, collectively
(used only by humans, and becoming archaic)
Purple Dragons
quarter-bench
Queen’s Guard (Evermeet)
Queen’s Spellguard (Evermeet)
Rage, the (in re: dragons)
Quiet Folk, the: gnomes
Rage of Dragons
rellana (wine)
Red Wizards
Returned Abeir
Reverie, the
ripplebark (fungus)
Robes of the Archmage
roofwrack
rothé
rothéhide
runner-lizard
sage probiter
sallar (typhuslike disease)
sarrukh
saurial
sava (chesslike game)
sceptrana
Scourged Legion
the Seldarine, the (elf pantheon)
selukiira (sing. or pl.)
Selûne (the goddess and the Moon)
Seraph
Seven, the (the seven liches that created
Crenshinibon)
Seven Sisters
sha (“friend” in Elvish)
sha`ir
Shade Enclave (what Shadovar call their city)
Shadow Deep, the (or Deep, the)
Shadowfell, the
Shadow Fringe, the (or Fringe, the)
Shadow Magic
shadow net
shadow self
shadow shield
shadowshell
shadowalk(ing)
shadow blanket
shadow crisis
shadowsilk
shadowstep
--- col ---
shadowstuff
shadowtop (tree)
shadow-web
Shadow Weave
Shaeradim, the
shaking fever (disease), the
Shaking Plague
Sha’Quessir (“elf friend” in Elvish)
Sharn Wall, the
shawm (a double-reed instrument, the ancestor of
the oboe and bassoon)
sickstone
silver fire
sky mage
slaugh (it is the word elves use for “pigs,” but
literally translates as “mud-wallowing-dogs”)
Sly Folk, the (halflings—mainly said by dwarves and
humans)
smallhold (modest family farm)
smokethorn (tree)
snortsnout (derogotory for orc)
snowfinch(es) (bird)
soapleaf (tree)
songblast songspider
songhorn (a recorder)
sorn: drow (used only by eladrin, elves, and half-
elves, and drow themselves)
soulbinding
soultheft s
pellarcher
spellblade
spell-guard
spell-major (Myth Drannor)
Spellplague, the (the event itself)
spellplague (pockets of the spellplague)
spell-prison
spellchain
spellfire
SpellGather (phaerimm)
spellscar
spellsinger
spell-song
spellscarred (someone who has been changed by
spellplague, but not to a monstrous extent)
spellwarped (derogatory term for someone with a
spellscar)
Spirit Soaring (not the Spirit Soaring)
Splicing, the
sporeflour bread (Underdark food staple)
Spotted Plague (plague/disease)
ssri Tel’Quessir
standath
starsphere
===== PAGE 29 =====
Stone Guard (elite troops from Gracklstugh)
stonefire bomb
stonelore
storehouse (pref. over warehouse)
Stout Folk, the: dwarves
stranglecord
swordmagic
swordmaster
swordwight
sy Tel’Quessir (“green or wild elf” in Elvish)
Syluné (one of the Seven Sisters)
tael (Elvish for a student of bladesinging in Elvish,
singular and plural)
tallglass
tanarukk
taol (coin)
tantan (a tambourine)
Taumaril (Cattie-brie’s bow)
Tears of Selûne, the
telkiira (sing. or pl.)
telmiirkara neshyrr (Elvish, “the rite of
transformation.”)
telthor (the nature-spirits the Rashemi worship)
telthukiilir (High Seeing Orb)
tenday (never week)
Ten-Towns
teu Tel’Quessir (“silver or moon elf” in Elvish)
thelarr (also called the whistlecane, this is a simple
reed instrument)
theurglass
thinblade (elven rapier)
thornback (epithet for phaerimm)
thoughtspeech throatslake (drink)
thunderthrone
tocken (set of carved, oval, open-ended bells, played
like a xylophone)
Tomb Guard (elves only)
Tower (Evermeet, but only in reference to the
institution, not the building)
Tower Guard (Evermeet)
tradebar
trademeet
tradeyard
Undercity
Underdark, the
ugrukh: wounded, defeated, slaves or those too
weak to defend themselves or to be worthy of
attention. (Used of all races, including their own, but
only by orcs)
Underhalls
--- col ---
undermages
underpriest
underpriestesses
va (“father” in Elvish)
vae (“son” in Elvish)
vigilant sister (priestess of Shar)
Vyshaanti battle-platform V
yvadnya (Rashemen witch-lore)
warchief
WarGather (phaerimm term)
wargong (also called a shieldgong, the wargong is
often made of the shields of one’s vanquished foes.
It is played with mallets)
warmaster
warpriest
war-dog
war-golem
war-mage
war-mythal
war wizard
watch-wizard
watermote
weapons master (not weapon master)
weathercloak
Weave, the
web street
weirwood (tree)
whipblade (a sort of rapier)
whipdagger
whitewasting (leprosylike disease)
winterchill fever (pneumonialike disease)
witchfire
Witch-King (of Vaasa)
World Above (Underdark term in ref. to the surface
world)
world-window
worms: goblins and small or puny orcs or other
goblinkin (used only by orcs)
wristbow
wychlaran (Rashemi witches)
yaddleskwee
yarting (a guitar)
Yor’thae
zaen’sheaen (“all-seeing gaze” in Elvish)
zalanthar (tree)
zulkoon (a complex and semiportable pump-organ)
zulkoon (musical instrument)
zurkhwood (a rare hardwood)
zzar