
Using the 5E Template
This series of instructions explains how to use the template in a Word 2011 for Mac environment.
Where Do I Put the D&D AL Template.dotx File?
You need to navigate to this folder by using this path:

Library/Application Support/Microsoft/Office/User Templates/My Templates

Place it in the My Templates folder.
Applying the Template to a New Document
If you’re creating a new document for D&D Next, you can do so in three different ways:
The Shortest Way
When you open Word, and if you placed the D&D AL Template.dotx in your My Templates folder, it should show up as an option. Choose it! You can also click on File in the Menu Bar and choose New from Template.
The Other Way
Alternatively, you could save the template as a .docx file and use that as your starting point.
Applying the Template to an Existing Document
If you need to apply the template to an existing document for D&D Next, you can do the following:

Open the document.
Click on Tools in the Menu Bar.
Click on Templates and Add-Ins in the pull-down menu.
Click on Attach in the Templates and Add-ins window that pops up.
Browse to where you placed the template file. My Templates is the default location.
Click on D&D AL Template.dotx and Open it.
Check the box next to Automatically update document styles.
Click OK.

After you do this, you need to check the file for the following things, and you might need to adjust them manually:
Add in the header and footer. Ensure that the styles are followed. You can do this by copying and pasting the header and footer from a properly styled existing document or by making a .docx file from the .dotx template file.
Check the page margins. They should be as follows: left, 0.8"; right, 0.8"; top, 1"; and bottom, 1". The header and footer should be set to 0.4" from the edge.
You should be aware of the styles that are in place in the document as you go. To see what should be available, in the Styles toolbox, you can use the List functionality to point the list to styles In Current Document to make it easier to see what you need to see. Please delete any styles that are no longer needed in the document; if you try to delete a style that is in use, look for the Select All option before you delete that style. (This option won’t be available if that style isn’t used in the document. Yes, this sounds strange. Welcome to templates.) You can select all instances of that style and change it to the preferred style before you delete the one that is not valid. Be aware that Word 2011 has some quirks still when it comes to deleting styles—sometimes you have to Clear Formatting to truly restyle text. Be mindful of styles as you go.
Columns: Go to Format in the Menu Bar. Choose Columns. Set them to two, and give them 0.5" spacing. The Title style should remain as one column; tables might need to flow to one column.
Unformatted Text
The absolute best way to ensure that you have no lingering styles from older documents tainting your new document is to use this process. WARNING: You will lose italics, bold, and other things that you want to keep, so use this only if you have the time (and preferably dual monitors) to go through and reformat characters as needed. This guarantees that you don’t have to contend with older styles, however, which is also a benefit.

Copy the text you wish to paste.
In the destination document, choose Edit in the menu bar and pick Paste Special. (Shortcut: Use Control-Command-V.)
Choose Unformatted Text when given the option.
Click OK.
Compare your original document to the new document and make changes as needed.

Congratulations! Hopefully you now have an AL templated and styled document! If you do this correctly, when you apply an updated template to a document that uses the AL Template, it will make changes in styles quick and easy to implement.
