
D&D 5E Template
Use the styles in this document when formatting your D&D document. Styles are the only way to ensure that your formatting makes it into InDesign during the file-conversion process. Don’t format text by using Word’s standard formatting tools. Styles only!
Style Guides
Before you proceed, read DnD House Style Guide.docx, which gives you the nuts and bolts on writing for D&D. If you’re creating a stat block, also read Stat Block Creation.docx.
Core Body
Core Body is the foundational style in this document—the one used for most of the body copy in our books. Don’t use Normal. Use Core Body.
Bold and Italics
Use the following character styles to apply bold or italics. Two of these styles are serif fonts and two are for sans serif fonts:
Bold Serif
Italic Serif
Bold Sans Serif
Italic Sans Serif
Chapter Title
The Chapter Title style should appear only at the start of a chapter. Don’t use Heading 1 for the title.
Subchapter Title
Use Subchapter Title only for chapter-like sections within a chapter, such as the class sections in the Player’s Handbook. In most cases, you should be using Heading 1 instead.
Heading 1
Epigraph is used for epigraphs and vignettes. An epigraph shouldn’t be enclosed in quotation marks, unless you’re excerpting a passage from a book and the quotes appear in the original.
—Epigraph Author, Source
Heading 1 is the highest-level heading after Chapter Title and Subchapter Title. The headings after Heading 1 should go in sequence: Heading 1, Heading 2, Heading 3, and then Inline Subhead, which functions as our Heading 4. Exceptions to this sequence should be made only by an editor.
Heading 2
The handsome horizontal line in a Heading 2 makes it very tempting to use in places where the heading doesn’t belong. Resist that temptation!
Heading 3
This Core Metadata style appears under a spell’s name. We use it in magic items and feats too.
Heading 3 ignores the heading sequence in two cases: the name of a spell or a magic item. Because of this exception, a section of spells or magic items shouldn’t begin with Heading 3.
Core Hanging. Use the Core Hanging style to include a list of things amid Core Body, especially when each thing begins with text in bold.
	Inline Subhead. The Inline Subhead character style serves as our Heading 4. Don’t use it for emphasis; use it as the lowest-level heading in the heading hierarchy. Examples of it abound in our books.
Core Bulleted is the style to use when you want to make a bulleted list amid Core Body. If you want to bold a term at the start of each list item, use the Core Hanging style instead.
Stat Block Title
Stat block metadata

Stat Block Data Take a look at stat blocks in the Monster Manual to see how these styles translate into a finished block. The section below uses the Stat Block Ability Score style. We’ve included plus and minus signs for you, since keyboards don’t easily produce the minus sign.

	STR	DEX	CON	INT	WIS	CHA
	X (+/−X)	X (+/−X)	X (+/−X)	X (+/−X)	X (+/−X)	X (+/−X)

Stat Block Data Notice that there’s no colon after the bold headings in a stat block.

Inline Subhead. The paragraphs below the data section use the Stat Block Body style.
Stat Block Heading
Inline Subhead. The Stat Block Heading style above is used for section starts like “Actions” and “Reactions.”
Stat Block Bulleted—this is the style for a bulleted list in a stat block.
Stat Block Hanging—use this style for things like spell lists.
This Boxed Text style is used only for text that a DM is meant to read to the players.
List Heading
List Item—the prime example of this style is the section of spell lists in the Player’s Handbook. 
Sidebar Heading
Sidebar Body is the style to use for a sidebar’s guts. When making a sidebar, ask yourself whether the sidebar must immediately follow a section of text or whether it can go anywhere on a spread. If it must immediately follow something, don’t make it a sidebar; integrate it into the body copy.
Sidebar Bulleted—this is the style for creating a bulleted list in a sidebar.
Table Title
Table Header
Table Header
Table Body is the style for a table’s guts. InDesign supports the import of tables, so a table can be used in Word.
Table Body
None of the shading here will transfer into InDesign. Only the styles matter.
Table Body

