
Magic Item Format
Item Format
Item Name
Item type, rarity
A description of the object. Include any relevant lore. Do not summarize the item’s properties here.
	Property Name or Other Subhead. Append a parenthetical to the subhead if a property requires attunement (“Attuned”) or has usage limitations, such as charges or uses per day.
Example Items
Flame Tongue
Weapon (longsword), rare
This blade is etched with flame designs that sometimes flare harmlessly. The sword is warm to the touch.
	Flaming Blade. As an action, you can speak the sword’s command word to cause flames to erupt from the blade. The flames emit bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light for 20 feet beyond that. The flames last until you speak the command word again or until you drop or stow the item. The flaming blade deals 2d6 extra fire damage on a hit.
Ring of Telekinesis
Ring, very rare
A sizable amethyst rises from a setting on this otherwise unadorned silver band.
	Telekinesis (Attuned). While wearing the ring, you can use your action to cast the telekinesis spell at will. The saving throw DC for the spell equals 8 + your Intelligence modifier + your proficiency bonus.
Ring of Shooting Stars
Ring, very rare
This tarnished ring of silver conceals its magical nature behind a cheap facade. Only when plunged into shadow or darkness do the blemishes on the ring fade in a silvery light, and the ring becomes a perfect white circle. A creature touching the glowing ring feels faint vibrations in the cool metal.
	Druids prize the ring as a symbol of devotion to the spirits of the night and stars.
	Attunement. To use any of the ring’s properties, you must attune yourself to the ring at night.
	Spells Within. While wearing the ring outdoors at night, you can cast the dancing lights and light cantrips. While wearing the ring at night or underground in an area of dim light or darkness, you can cast faerie fire twice per day.
	Ball Lightning (1/Day). As an action while you are wearing the ring at night under an open sky, you cause up to four 3-foot-diameter spheres of lightning to appear in unoccupied spaces within 120 feet of you. The spheres last for as long as you concentrate, up to 1 minute. The spheres shed dim light in a 30 foot radius.
	On your turn, you can move each sphere up to 40 feet to anywhere within 120 feet of you. When a creature comes within 5 feet of a sphere, the sphere immediately dissipates and the creature must make a DC XX Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes lightning damage determined by the number of spheres you created. 
Spheres	Lightning Damage
	4	2d4
	3	2d6
	2	5d4
	1	4d12
	Shooting Stars (3 Charges). As an action, choose up to three creatures you can see within 60 feet of you. When you do so, you can expend up to 3 charges, launching one glowing missile that leaves behind a fiery trail from the ring for each charge you expend. Divide these missiles between the targets. 
	Make a ranged attack roll for each missile. You have a bonus to the roll equal to your magic ability modifier (or your Charisma modifier) + your proficiency bonus. On a hit, the target takes 5d4 bludgeoning damage. Whether the missile hits or misses, it explodes in 5-yard radius cloud. Each creature in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 10d4 fire damage on failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one. 
	The fire damages objects in the area and ignites flammable objects that are not being worn or carried.
	The ring regains all expended charges, once every 10 days at dusk.
	Spark Shower (1/Day). As an action while you are wearing the ring at night or underground in dim light or darkness, a flying cloud of sizzling purple sparks fills a 20-foot cone. Each creature in the area takes 2d4 lightning damage. Creatures wearing metal armor take 2d4 extra damage.

