
===== PAGE 1 =====
D&D Style Guide: Writing and Editing
We have two primary resources for the house
Tsthyel eCh oicfa DgUo NMGaEnOuNaSl &of DStRyAleG, O1N7tSh p erdoidtiounc ts:
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 11th edition GThee rnulees irn athlis Rsecutiolne apsp ly to all D&D
products, whether RPG books, board games,
novels, or something else.
This guide takes both of those works as its
foundation, so it focuses on matters of style and
Titles and Trademarks
spelling that are particular to D&D products,
where we depart from or expand on the D UNGEONS & D RAGONS
recommendaCtiohnsi cofa thgoseo works. In a print publication, set the name of our brand
in small caps: DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. The
The Chicago Manual of Style ampersand should be the same size as the capital
letters. If the font you’re using makes the
Using is a gold mine of ampersand smaller, don’t set the ampersand in
guidance for writers and editors. If you aren’t small caps.
familiar with it or have used only an earlier On the web and in any other context where
edition, start with the following chapters and small caps are unavailable, capitalize the brand
•se ctions: name with no special typographic treatment:
Dungeons & Dragons.
Section 5.250, “Glossary of Problematic Words TDh&eD a Nbborte Svyinatoinonym, Do&uDs ,w isi tnhe itthhee rR sPeGt .in small
and Phrases.” Not sure whether to use caps nor italicized.
“alternate” or “alternative”? Feeling as if Bear in
“indicate” appears a bit too frequently in D&D mind that DUNGEONS & DRAGONS encompasses
• rules? This section addresses these matters, various games, novels, and worlds. The brand
among many others. name is not synonymous with the tabletop
Chapter 6, “Punctuation.” This chapter is the roleplaying game. That game is the DUNGEONS &
authoritative reference for how to correctly use DRAGONS Roleplaying Game. Inside a product for
• commas, colons, semicolons, dashes, and other thEatd gitaimones, iotf i sth aec cRePpGta.ble to refer to the game as
punctuation in our publications. DUNGEONS & DRAGONS or D&D.
Chapter 7, “Spelling, Distinctive Treatment of In a departure from
Words, and Compounds.” The whole chapter is pTreevxitosu sa ubsoaguet, wDe& spDe lSl oeuttt ianngd slo wercase
worth skimming, but the treasure trove is at the
Your main references for our worlds, such as the
• end: section 7.89. That section addresses the Forgotten Realms and Dragonlance, should be guides
many conundrums related to compound words.
that we provide or official products published for the
Chapter 9, “Numbers.” When to use numerals fifth edition of the D&D roleplaying game.
and when not to—that’s the meat of this Don’t rely on Internet searches to give you the right
chapter. answer to questions about a D&D setting. The Internet
contains contradictions, misinterpretations, and
If you’re the copyeditor of a D&D manuscript, outright fabrications. Both Wikipedia and the Forgotten
make sure to look at section 2.77, a useful Realms Wiki, for instance, contain some unreliable
checklist of things to tidy up before you dive into information.
your copyediting. Also, beware of relying solely on D&D products from
previous editions. They often present conflicting or
outdated information about a setting.
If you have a question that isn’t answered in one of
our guides or products, please contact us.
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 1
===== PAGE 2 =====
references to editions of the roleplaying game. Trademarks appearing on the web or in the
We write “fifth edition,” for instance, not “5th interior of books don’t receive trademark
EDduintgioeno.n” WMaes pterre'fse Gr utoid uese an edition designation symbols. The titles of most recent products are
as a modifier of another term—“the fifth edition trademarked. A list later in this guide presents
,” for example. some of our trademarks with their symbols.
Our internal documentation occasionally uses
edition abbreviations like 4E and 5E. In other
Issue Numbers
contexts, such abbreviations should appear only When referring to an issue of a magazine, write
in a table, a conversion document, or in an tDhrea gitoanlicized titleD froalgloowned by a nuDmraegroanl t1h0a0t is
informal text. not italicized. For example, you would write
100, not #100 or .
Typographic Treatment of Product
Names and Other Trademarks Adventure Codes
The name of a pubCliacsattlieo Rna, bvoenalrodf tgame, or Many classic adventures for the tabletop
miniFaoturgreostt seent Rise acalmpist aClaizmepda aignnd Siteatltiicnizged. roleplaying game have codes, such as I6 and DL1.
Examples include Basic Rules (board game) Such a code is not part of the adventure’s title and
and (book). is not italicized. The code is a short way to refer
Another example is the , the free to an adventure and should not be used in a
version of the game available online. Initially we context where the adventure’s title has not been
didn’t italicize it; we do now. stated.
Any other trademark of ours is capitalized and
romanized. Examples include computer games,
campaign settings, play programs, and product Gender
lines, such as Forgotten Realms (setting), D&D We expect gender neutrality whenever the
Encounters (play program), and D&D Dungeon gender of a person is unknown or irrelevant. We
Tiles (product line). don’t assume that our readers are of a particular
gender identity.
Chicago
Symbols
A trademark symbol (™ and ®) appears the first Achieving Gender Neutrality
time a trademark appears on packaging, on a See 5.255 for tips on achieving gender-
cover, or in marketing material. neutral language. Use “he or she” sparingly, and
High Fantasy
avoid “he/she” and “s/he” altogether. Also, don’t
A typical D&D story or adventure is part of the high alternate between “he” and “she” in an attempt to
fantasy subgenre of fantasy fiction, with the epic be inclusive.
scope characteristic of that subgenre.
In rules text, we prefer to achieve gender
D&D is about small bands of characters embarking
neutrality by writing in the second person
on adventures together. Teamwork and friendship
whenever possible.
are a huge part of what makes D&D distinct as a
In a departure from our past usage, we allow
brand. The lone knight fighting a dragon is less
the use of “they” and “their” as singular pronouns,
characteristic of D&D than an adventuring team
but don’t abuse this liberCtyh.i Rcaeglyo on this device
fighting a dragon. People on their own get into
only when you have no other reasonable or
trouble; a team that works together can triumph.
pleasing alternative. See 5.256 for a
Elements of humor or tragedy are fine, so long as
discussion of this topic.
they are true to the facts of the brand and don’t
overtake the general tone. When in doubt, think
about properties like the Lord of the Rings or Game of
Gender and Fantasy Races
Thrones. If a situation would seem out of place there, “Man,” “woman,” and their plurals are reserved
it probably doesn’t belong in D&D. For instance, there for describing humans only. For example, we
are moments of humor with the hobbits, but ring write “male dwarf,” not “dwarf man” or “man
wraiths aren’t used for gags. dwarf.”
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 2
===== PAGE 3 =====
This rule can be broken in dialogue and first- HeKreee’sn a Sne enxsaems. ple of doing it correctly:
person narrative, since a character doesn’t
necessarily follow our editorial style! You have proficiency in the
Perception skill.
Gender-Specific Suffixes
Avoid gender-specific suffixes whenever possible. H eKreee’sn a Sne enxsaems:ple of doing it incorrectly:
For example, we write “priest” or “actor” whether
the person is male or female. Use a word like You have proficiency in the
“priestess” or “actress” only if it’s part of a Perception skill.
person’s title or an in-world organizations’ titles.
Another example: use “god” whether the deity Don’t confuse an inline subhead with the
is maleC hoirc afegmoale. Again, in-world uses of bolded title of a stat block entry or other data
“goddess” are fine. field. Such an entry rarely contains a complete
See 5.257 for more on this matter. sentence. The entry takes the form of a bolded
variable name—sometimes followed by a colon—
Sapnede tdh 3e0n f tt.h e variable’s value. Here are examples:
Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil, Lael, Mella
Headings
Range: 60 ft.
We expect headings to be used logically and
consistently throughout a manuscript. Work your
way down the heading hierarchy without
skipping steps (each heading has an associated
Finally, don’t use an inline subhead when you
Csthyalpet einr Toituler Word and InDesign templates):
simply want to emphasize a word or phrase. Use
Heading 1
bold for such emphasis, unless the emphasized
Heading 2
term or phrase appears in the section’s heading.
Heading 3
Then, no emphasis is required. For example, if a
Inline Subhead [aka Heading 4]
Heading 3 says “Ki Points,” don’t bold “ki points”
in the associated running text.
Use a heading for a structural reason, not an
name of a spell
Exceptions in the RPG
aesthetic one. Moreover, don’t use a bunch of One thing in the RPG defies the heading
inline subheads out of a desire to avoid having hierarchy: the at the top of a
more than one Heading 1–3 on the page. If you spell description always uses the Heading 3 style,
aren’t happy with the headings in your even if preceded by Heading 1 or Chapter Title.
manuscript, restructure the text. Don’t misuse Given this fact, a section of spells shouldn’t be
headings. introduced by a Heading 3.
Some adventures contain other exceptions to
the heading hierarchy, but such exceptions are
Inline Subheads
The lowest level of our heading hierarchy is the nonstandard and shouldn’t be mimicked without
inline subhead. It functions as our heading 4. the managing editor’s approval.
Contrary to past D&D usage, this subhead should
be followed by terminal punctuation, not a colon.
Use a period, an exclamation point, or a question Sidebars
mark. Avoid overusing sidebars. If a sidebar must follow
If you’re using our styles in Word or InDesign, a particular section of text to be intelligible, it
apply the Inline Subhead style to the subhead probably shouldn’t be a sidebar. The best
(including the terminal punctuation). If you don’t sidebars can appear anywhere on a page and still
have access to the style, set the subhead in bold make sense.
italics to distinguish it from text that is simply
bold.
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 3
===== PAGE 4 =====
Use of “Non-.” Chicago
Although says that
“compounds formed with prefixes are normally
Spelling and Punctuation
closed,” our use of “non-” is often an exception to
We use American style for spelling and
this rule. The prefix is hyphenated in front of
punctuation. The word list later in this guide lists
unusual Wwoerbdstse arn’sd varCiahnict asgpoellings that appear
mWaenbsyt eorf ’osur fantasy races: non-elf, non-dwarf,
in D&D products.
noNnu-omrcb,e nrosn a-nddro Awb (bbruetv niaotniohnusm.an, as in
).
WNheewn Oxford Am aenrdic an Dictio pnraorvyide no
A rule that’s easy
guidance on how to spell something, we refer to
to miss in 7.89 is that we don’t hyphenate a
the (installed on
compound composed of a numeral and an
all recent Macs) as a backup resource.
abbreviation. So, it’s a “100 gp treasure,” not a
Chicago
“100-gp treasure.”
Punctuation, Boldface, and Italics
Refer to 6.2 and 6.3 for how to deal with
punctuation that follows bold or italics. Contractions
T hTe hGelo froyl loof wStiynleg. eTxhaem prpelveios ufso lpleorwio do uisr b sotlyd lieta: lics We eCnhciocuargaoge the use of contractions formed
because the entire inline subhead is bold italics. with “not,” such as “don’t,” “can’t,” and “wasn’t”
The room is home to three hobgoblins, each of whom (see 5.105). Use other contractions with
loves to collect books on editorial style. care, especially any contraction that can be
The wizard has prepared burning hands, magic missile, misread. For example, “who’s” can be read as
and shield. “who is” or “who has.”
Chicago
Possessives
has given different recommendations
InsTidhee t fhoel lhoowveinl lgu rekx faivme pgolebsli ndso, nw’th ofo hlalovwe n oou rre gsatrydle f:o r
typographic tidiness.
over the years on how tso treat possessives,
particularly those that involve words that end
The cleric prepared cure wounds, shield of faith, and
flurry of italics.
with Cahni cuangporonounced , as in “Descartes.” We
follow the approach in the seventeenth edition
(see 7.16–29).
The Serial Comma Words Used as Words
We require the serial comma. Here’s an example: OChuirc astgyole for words used as words is to enclose
“The apprentice expressed gratitude to his them in quotes if the words are English (see
parents, Mystra, and Elminster.” We don’t write, 7.63). For example, “The alchemist’s
“The apprentice expressed gratitude to his favorite word was ‘pumpkin,’ so he knew exactly
parents, Mystra and Elminster,” unless Mystra what to name his golem: Pumpkin.”
and Elminster are the apprentice’s parents. A non-English word, whether from the real
ewborraltdh or a D&D world, is italicized when used as
a word. For example, “She whispered the word
Webster’s
Variant Spellings
Many words have variant spellings. If a word has
, ElviCshh ifcoarg ‘ofriend.’”
In contrast, a letter used as a letter is set in
variants in , we use the one printed first
italics (see 7.64–68).
(regardless of alphabetical order), except as
noted in the D&D word list. For example, we use
“toward,” not “towards,” and we use “backward,” Bulleted Lists
not “backwards.” When you create a bulleted list—or any other
vertiCcahli cliasgt,o such as a numbered one—introduce
Chicago
it with a complete sentence ending with a colon
Compounds and Hyphenation
(see 6.130).
See 7.81–89 for extensive guidance on
We begin each list item with a capital letter. Use
using compounds—open, closed, or hyphenated.
closing punctuation in an item only if the list is
When in doubt, lean on the multipage table in
composed of complete sentences.
7.89, an especially valuable resource.
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 4
===== PAGE 5 =====
½ One-half
⅔ Two-thirds
¾ Three-fourths
Numbers and Math
Chicago
Numerals versus Words
We follow the general rule for numerals that is When a fraction stands on its own in numeral
presented in 9.2. In short, we spell out form, as in a table, don’t use the fraction’s symbol.
whole numbers from zero to one hundred, as well For example, write “1/2,” not “½.” But do write
as numbers that are formed by adding “hundred,” “1½.”
“thEoxucesapntido,”n os rt o“h tuhned Rruedle t.housand” to oCnhei coafg o
those numbers.
Percentages
Chapter 9 of
Use the word “percent,” rather than the symbol %,
spells out many exceptions to this rule, instances
to express a percentage (“5 percent,” for
when numerals are used even when a number is
example). You can break this rule in a table, as
less than 101. The exceptions that are most
well as in a list where space is tight.
•re levant to our work are summarized here:
Also, the abbreviation we use for percentile
•
dice is d100, not d%.
Percentages′ {″45 percent, 53%}
• Abbreviations and symbols used as units of
measure {63 , 5 gp, 3 lb.} “Half” vs. “One-Half”
When halving a quantity or game statistic, write
• Parts of a book or other work {chapter D2r, apgaortn 3,
“half,” not “one-half.” So, you would write “half
page D3u4n, sgceeonne 6, table 9, encounter 9, area 4}
your level,” not “one-half your level.”
• Volume and issue numbers {volume 3,
• 125, 75}
Currency {$15, £4}
Cross-References
• Dates {1299 DR; Marpenoth 12, 1113; October
Use cross-references judiciously. They are useful
31}
tools that can be easily overused.
Times {10:15 a.m., 12:30 p.m.}, but use “noon”
aNnudm “emriadlns iignh Rt”u les.
Chapter References
When you refer to a chapter, use its number. If
In rules writing, we use
referencing a chapter’s title would increase
numerals more often. See “Numerals in Rules
clarity, include the title in quotation marks. But
Text” later in this guide.
chapter number alone usually suffices. Here are
e• xamples:
Mathematical Symbols •
When a mathematical symbol appears, we expect
See chapter 2 for how to make your character.
+th e cPolursr seicgtn mathematical character to be used.
− Minus sign (Unicode 2212, not a hyphen or an en
• Chapter 8, “The Rules of DMuanggice,o” ne xMpalastiners’ sh ow
dash)
Gspueidllecasting works.
Consult chapter 3 of the
÷ Division sign
× Multiplication sign (Unicode 00D7, not the letter x) for further advice on adventure creation.
= Equals sign
Appendix References
We use letters, not numbers, for appendices.
References to appendices should follow the same
principles that we follow for chapter references.
Fractions
Spell out a simple fraction, such as two-thirds, but H• ere are examples:
whe⅔n you combine a simple fraction with a •
See appendix A for definition of each condition.
numeral, use the appropriate fraction symbol, as
i¼n 4On. e-fourth The game statistics for each creature are
⅓ One-third provided in appendix C.
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 5
===== PAGE 6 =====
Subsection/Table References
When you refer to a subsection, including a
SThte yfollloew iRng ustyllee rsul efso aprp lyt tho tehe RtabPletGop
sidebar, use its title in quotes. A table title is not
roleplaying game and to products based on it.
e• nclosed in quotes. Here are examples:
When it comes to familiarizing yourself with
The “Roleplaying the Dragon” sidebar gives tips the game’s terms and customs of wording, there
• on how to bring the dragon fully to life in the is no substitute for reading the rules of the game
story. themselves.
• See the “Actions in Combat” section for more
examples of things you can do in battle.
The Cleric table lists the features your cleric Formatting Game Terms
In the RPG, certain terms receive special
gains at each level.
typographic treatment. Examples here are given
As in those examples, make sure a reference is Tine crmursly t obr Caackpeittas.l ize
clear about what it’s referring to—whether it’s Ability scores {Strength, Intelligence}
referring to a sidebar, a section, or a table, for Action names {the Attack action, the Dash action}
instance. Armor Class
Artifacts {Axe of the Dwarvish Lords}
Class features {Sneak Attack, Rage}
Page References
Difficulty Class
We avoid page references as much as possible.
Dungeon Master
They are labor-intensive (they must be added by
Feats {Loremaster}
hand during galley review), and they invite error.
Languages {Common, Dwarvish, Elvish}
A page refereMncoen isst eurs Muaalnlyu saulperfluous if it
Planes of existence {the Abyss, the Nine Hells, the
points to text in an alphabetized section (a
Ethereal Plane, the Plane of Air}
monster in the , for instance).
Skills {Arcana, Perception}
Referencing a particular page in another
Traits in races and monsters {Aquatic, Keen Senses}
product is especially ill-advised; that product’s
pagination could change in a reprint or a new Terms to Set in Bold
edition.
Stat block names in running text {three hobgoblins, one
Use a page reference only if the text you want drow mage, two fire elementals}
to reference doesn’t appear in a product’s index
and can’t be referred to by chapter or subsection.
Before galley review, write a page reference as Monster Manual
“page xx.” By default, a bold stat block name refers to a stat
bMloonckst ienr tMhaen ual . If you’re referring to
a stat block in your manuscript, instaeaird of in the
Unspoken Discourse elemental myrm, uisdeo an psarenthetical to make that
In D&D fiction, authors are free to use italics, fact clear. Here’s an example: “Four
quotation marks, or nCoh idciasgtionguishing typography (see chapter 7) lurk here.”
to present a character’s thoughts or psionic Make sure no text gets betweegno bthlien nsumber of
communication (see 13.43). Aesthetics monsters agpopbelairnisng and the name of the stat
and clarity should dictate appropriate usage. block. For example, write “four ,” not
(This is a change from our previous policy.) “four loud ”; that adjective needs to go
somewhere else in the sentence.
Set a monster’s name in bold only the first time
on
Planes of Existence it appears in an encounter area or other
A character is ai nplane of existence. For Tsuebrmsesc ttioo nIt. alicize
example, “He was trapped on the Plane of Fire.” Artifacts {Axe of the Dwarvish Lords}
But a character is a plane when it is referred to Magic items {flame tongue}
by name without the word “plane.” For example, Spells {magic missile}
“She is in Elysium.”
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 6
===== PAGE 7 =====
•
The italicized terms are treated as titles, even The tower is nearly three hundred feet tall.
whenC hthiceayg doon’t use title capitalizationw. aDlol onf’ tf ire
confuse one of these titles with an wefaflelc otf i fti rcereates You cast a spell.
(see 8.174). For example, the VYoue drebal dUamsaageg. e
spell produces a wall of fire, not a (the You drop to 0 hit points.
latter would imply an infinite loop). You finish a short or long rest.
You gain temporary hit points.
You make an ability check, and it succeeds or fails.
Numerals in Rules Text You make a saving throw, and it succeeds or fails.
Use numerals for points, scores, damage You make an attack (or you attack), and your attack hits
expressions, and any game trait with a numerical or misses (it doesn’t succeed or fail).
v• alue. You reduce a target to 0 hit points.
You regain hit points.
• Anyone who touches the orb regains 3 hit You restore hit points to a target.
You score a critical hit.
points.
You take an action, or you use your action to do
• Someone with a speed of 25 feet will not be
something.
able to keep up.
You take damage.
• A character must have an Intelligence of at least
You use a feature.
13 to understand the script.
The cursed glyph deals 10 necrotic damage to
anyone who touches it.
Use numerals for units of time that quantify the
Common Pitfalls
duration of a game effect, a condition, or a state of
a• ffairs in a tactical situation.
Making a Roll vs. Succeeding on One
• Don’t mistake making an ability check, a saving
The spell lasts for 1 round. throw, or other roll with succeeding on it. The
No one can use the door for 10 minutes. following sentence gets it right: “You must
succeed on a DC 15 Strength check to clamber up
•B ut:
the wall.” Don’t write, “You must make a DC 15
Strength check to clamber up the wall,” unless
• After winning the fight, the characters slept for
that sentence is immediately followed by a
six hours.
description of what happens on a success or
For three days, they wandered aimlessly in the
failure.
forest.
Save.
Use numerals for units of distance that quantify Saving Throws
t•h e size or extent of game effects. “Save” can be used as a synonym for
• “saving throw,” but use it sparingly, preferably
The attack has a range of 30 feet. only in a stat block or when preceded by “saving
The protective circle extends 5 feet beyond the throw.” In 4E, we used “save” as a synonym for
doorway. “su“Mccuessts fMula skaev .i n. g.” throw.” We have abandoned
that practice.
Use numerals for dimensions and distances in the m Wuhsetnm aa ckreeature is subjected
game world on a tactical scale, including height to an effect that rmeqaukierses a saving throw, we
a• nd weight. prRefoelrli “ntgh ea t Saargveint g Thr ow. a saving throw . . .”
• over “the target a saving throw . . .”
The room is 20 feet square.
Writing “roll a saving
She stands 6 feet tall and weighs 150 pounds.
throw” is redundant, since a saving throw, by
definition, involves a throw of a die. You make a
B• ut:
saving throw.
The two cities are fifty miles apart.
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 7
===== PAGE 8 =====
maximum is 25 or more . . .” or “If the target’s hit
Passive Perception
point maximum is less than 50 . . .”
Use passive Wisdom (Perception) when the check
is made passively, but use regular Wisdom
(Perception) when the check is made actively. Proficiency
Here are the rules of thumb for using the right
with
preposition with the words “proficient” and
on
Advantage and Disadvantage “•p roficiency”: in
You make aa trtoalcl k roll advantage or disadvantage,
or you have advantage or disadvantage a roll.
You are proficient, or have proficiency, a skill,
Also, an , not an attack, has
• language, or other activity that is learnawblieth and
advantage or disadvantage.
repeatable.
You are proficient, or have proficiency, a
“Result” and Die Rolls tool, weapon, type of armor, or other object.
In 3E and 4E, the word “result” was sometimes
used as a synonym for “the number rolled on a For example, you might be proficient in Elvish
die.” We have abandoned that practice. and Arcana, and you might be proficient with
When you need to refer to the number rolled on longswords and heavy armor.
a die, do so idiomatically. Here are examples: “If
you roll at least a 10, you succeed,” “You score a
“At Will” vs. “At-Will”
critical hit if you roll a 20,” and “Add the number
This compound is open. For example, “You can
you roll to any bonuses or penalties.”
cast this spell at will.” The compound takes a
“Result” can legitimately refer to the sum of a
hyphen only when it appears before a word that
die roll and any modifiers. “Compare the result to
it modifies. For example, “That character has
the DC to determine whether you succeed,” for
three at-will spells.”
example. We often prefer the word “total” in such
a context.
“Dungeon Master” Isn’t a Verb
This term is a noun, not a verb. A person is a
“Magic” vs. “Magical” Dungeon Master. The person doesn’t Dungeon
We use “magic” as an adjective to describe an
Master. This rule can be broken in an informal
object that has magical qualities (a magic item, a
context, such as in a blog or a web article that has
magic sword, a magic trap).
a conversational tone.
The adjective can be used for other things, but
we use “magical” more often than “magic” for
them. And “magic item” and its variants should Avoid “Week” and “Month”
The lengths of weeks and months vary in
never be “magical item.”
different D&D worlds. A week is ten days long in
the Forgotten Realms, for instance, and is called a
Points of Damage tenday.
Avoid referring to points of damage. For example,
Because of this fact, don’t express durations or
write, “The spell deals 10 fire damage,” not “The
other lengths of time in weeks or months when
spell deals 10 points of fire damage.”
you’re writing rules. For example, say a game
effect lasts for 7 days, not 1 week.
The length of the year varies as well, but you
Extra Damage
We write “an extra 1d4 fire damage,” not “1d4 may use years for durations and the like.
extra fire damage.” We like to keep the die
expression with the damage type.
Misusing “Human” and “Humanoid”
Beware of using “human” as a synonym for
“mortal.” Many of the people in the mortal world
Hit Point Maximum
When you write about a creature’s hit point of D&D aren’t human. Similarly, be cautious when
maximum, avoid “maximum hit points.” using the word “humanoid,” given the fact that it
Writing in the singular allows for natural, refers to a creature type. For example, a giant has
precise wording, such as “If the target's hit point
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 8
===== PAGE 9 =====
larva (singular; plural larvae)
lizardfolk (singular and plural)
humanlike features, but it isn’t a humanoid in the lock pick (noun)
game. lorekeeper (by extension from gamekeeper, bookkeeper,
goalkeeper, etc.)
aarakocra (singular and plural) magic-user
adamantine (a noun and an adjective that refers to a merfolk (singular and plural)
Wspeociarl mdat eLriail isn tth e worlds of D&D) merrow (singular and plural)
a.m. (not AM or A.M.) mithral (not mithril)
axe (sec. var.) multiverse (not capped)
Bladesinger oni (singular and plural)
bosun packmate
copyeditor pickaxe
councilor (sec. var.) p.m. (not PM or P.M.)
dao (singular and plural) roleplay/roleplaying
djinni (singular; plural djinn) rulebook
doppelganger sahuagin (singular and plural)
dragonfire (fire produced by a dragon’s breath weapon) scry/scries/scried/scrying/scryer (one who scries)
dragonkind sellsword
drow (singular and plural) shapechange/shapechanger
dryly (sec. var.) shapeshifter (avoid “shapeshift”)
duergar (singular and plural) slaad (singular; plural slaadi)
dwarven (adjective) spell duel
dwarves (not dwarfs) spell scroll
Dwarvish (language) spell trap
ebook spell ward
efreeti (singular; plural efreet) spell-shield
eladrin (singular and plural) spellbook
elven (adjective) spellcaster/spellcasting (but not “spellcast”)
Elvish (language) spellcraft (noun)
email spellfire
erinyes (singular and plural) stablemaster
foulspawn (singular and plural) staffs
genasi (singular and plural) sunrod
giantkind svirfneblin (singular and plural)
Gnomish (language) swordmaster
goblinkin swordsmith
goblinoid tavernkeeper
hell-spawned (adjective) thri-kreen (singular and plural)
hellspawn (noun) timeline
kenku (singular and plural) war band (not warband)
weaponsmith
Adventuring Parties worshiped/worshiper/worshiping (secondary variant in
Webster’s)
The word “fellowship” has strong connections with The
xorn (singular and plural)
Lord of the Rings and doesn’t represent the typical D&D
yuan-ti (singular and plural)
adventuring party well. “Fellowship” might be used in-
world in the name of an adventuring band (the
Forgotten Realms Terms
Fellowship of the Griffon), and a group of adventurers
Goodman/Goodwoman (a title or form of address, usu.
who appeared to be good friends might be referred to
capped)
as a fellowship by someone speaking of them. However,
godsforsaken (established in the Realms, but not
D&D adventuring companies are often fractious or
necessary in other polytheistic settings; “godforsaken”
more mercenary than the word “fellowship” implies. In
has no necessary connection to monotheism)
most in-world contexts and all other contexts, use
goodsir (a form of address, not capped)
“group,” “band,” “company,” or, especially, “party.”
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 9
===== PAGE 10 =====
magecraft (noun) NPC nonplayer character
magelight
magelord Trademarks
magesight The titles of most recent publications are trademarked.
the Realms (should be preceded by “the Forgotten Refer to a product to see if it was trademarked. In
Realms”) addition, refer to this list.
AD&D®
Editions of the Tabletop RPG (AD&D)
Advanced Dungeons & Dragons™
first edition
Alternity®
second edition
Blackmoor
third edition
Castle Ravenloft®
third edition (v.3.5)
Chainmail®
fourth edition
D&D®
fifth edition
D&D Encounters™
D&D Insider™
Abbreviations
D&D Miniatures®
Abbrev. Brand or Product
D&D Dungeon Tiles®
D&D DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
d20 Modern™
PH Player's Handbook
d20 System™
DMG Dungeon Master's Guide
Dark Sun®
MM Monster Manual
DCI®
v.3.5 version 3.5
Dragon®
Dragonlance®
Abbrev. Ability Score
Dungeon®
Str Strength
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS®
Dex Dexterity
Eberron®
Con Constitution
Forgotten Realms®
Int Intelligence
Gamma World™
Wis Wisdom
Greyhawk®
Cha Charisma
Lords of Waterdeep®
Neverwinter™
Abbrev. Coin
Planescape™
gp gold piece(s)
Ravenloft®
ep electrum piece(s)
RPGA®
cp copper piece(s)
sp silver piece(s)
Armor
pp platinum piece(s)
chain mail
dragon leather
Abbrev. Die
dragon scale
d4 four-sided die
hide armor
d6 six-sided die
leather armor
d8 eight-sided die
mithral plate
d10 ten-sided die
mithral scale
d12 twelve-sided die
mithral shirt
d20 twenty-sided die
padded armor
d100 percentile dice
ring mail
scale mail
Abbrev. Other Term
studded dragon leather
AC Armor Class
studded leather armor
DC Difficulty Class
DM Dungeon Master
Weapons
XP experience points
battleaxe
HD Hit Die/Dice
blowgun
hp hit points
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 10
===== PAGE 11 =====
greataxe
greatclub
greatsword
hand crossbow
handaxe
heavy crossbow
light crossbow
light hammer
longbow
longsword
morningstar
polearm
quarterstaff (pl. quarterstaffs)
shortbow
shortsword
unarmed strike
war pick
warhammer
Version 1.08a ©2018 Wizards of the Coast 11