
Small Jjjjj] 


$2.95 U.S./S3.75 CAN. 


"38716 36009 


by Robert 
Silverberg 


Phillip C. Jennings 
James Alan Gardner 













Description 

|BB 




#10360 $16.99 



Volumes 1 & 2 

I #43057 
$27.98 

Count both 

one selection. 

Eli 

Sip 

yBgj&gi ; 


#10424 $22.99 #10463 $17.99 #10393 $18.99 #10449 $17.99 

mm 



#10075 $18.99 #10025 $19.99 #10394 $17.99 #10325 $15.99 pb 




#10286 $18.99 #10158 $18.95 #10328 $18.95 #10462 $17.99 #10245 $14.99 pb 


AS A CLUB MEMBER, 
YOU'LL ENJOY: 

• Discounts from 15-65% on 
every book you buy! 

• FREE Bonus Books! 

• FREE postage & handling on 
prepaid orders (after this 
joining offer)! 

• Satisfaction Guaranteed 100%! 


HOW THE CLUB WORKS 

You’ll receive the BULLETIN every four weeks, about 14 
times a year, featuring a Main Selection and 100 or more of 
the newest and best writing instruction books. If you want 
the Main Selection, do nothing, and it will be sent automati¬ 
cally. If you want a different book, or want nothing that 
month, you’ll always have at least 10 days to decide and 
notify the Club by returning your Selection Card. If late 
delivery of the BULLETIN should ever cause you to receive 
a book you don’t want, you may return it at club expense. As 
a new member you agree to purchase one book from the 
BULLETIN within the next she months; after that, you may 
cancel your membership at any time. Each time you buy a 
book, your membership will be renewed for six months from 
the purchase date. 
























MEMBERSHIP SAVINGS CERTIFICATE 

□ YES! I want to join Writer’s Digest Book Club. Please sign me up and send me: 

My first. FREE book #.. FREE 

and my second FREE book #... FREE 

with my third book #_for only.$_ 9.95 

plus postage and handling.$ 5.61 

all for just.S 15.56 

(Payment must accompany order. Ohio residents add 60C tax; Canadians add $1.09 GST.) 

□ Check enclosed or Charge my □ VISA □ MasterCard 

A cct* m~T n r !'• i mil 'm .—_ 

I have read the membership plan and agree to buy 1 more book in the next 6 months. 
Signature_ 

required on all certificates 

N ame_ 

Address_ 

City____State_ZIP___ 

Wlvitov’c Dt (TOO/ ()ffer R°°d for new members in U.S. and Canada only. U.S. funds only. 
J VA/tf/A o I/fgKot Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery. All applications subject to approval. 

BOOK CLUB 


P.O. Box 12948 Cincinnati, Ohio 45212-0948 


AS34 


























Asimovs 


Vol. 21 No. 2 (Whole Number 254) Next Issue on Sale 

February 1997 January 21, 1997 



16 Call Me Titan _Robert Silverberg 

38 One Good Juror_Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 

76 Three Hearings on the 

Existence of Snakes in the 

Human Bloodstream_James Alan Gardner 

96 Passing the Torch _Uncle River 

124 The Runaways _Phillip C. Jennings 

E mm a 

15 Love Bite _Jenna A. Felice 

37 System Crash _Peg Healy 

122 17 Question the Judges of 

Nuremburg Forgot to Ask_William John Watkins 

4 Reflections: Memories of a 

Curious Childhood_Robert Silverberg 

10 Letters_ 

152 On Books _Peter Heck 

160 The SF Conventional Calendar _Erwin S. Strauss 



Stories from 
Asimov's have won 
twenty-six Hugos 
and twenty-two 
Nebula Awards, and 
our editors have 
received eleven 
Hugo Awards for 
Best Editor. 

Asimov's was also 
the 1995 recipient 
of the Locus Award 
for Best Magazine. 


a division of Crosstown Publications. One year subscription $33.97 in the United States and 
U.S. possessions. In all other countries $41.97 (GST included in Canada), payable in advance 
in U.S. funds. Address for subscription and all other correspondence about them, Box 5130, 
Harlan, IA 51593-5130. Allow 6 to 8 weeks for change of address. Address for all editor ial 
matters: Asimov's Science Fiction, 1270 Avenue of the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10020. 

Publications. © 1996 by Dell Magazines, a division of Crosst^Tpublications, 1270 Avenue of 
the Americas, New York, N.Y. 10020. All rights reserved, printed in the U.S.A. Protection 
secured under the Universal and Pan American Copyright Conventions. Reproduction or use of 
editorial or pictorial content in any manner without express permission is prohibited. All sub- 

bililv for unsolicited manuscripts. Periodical postage paid at New York, NY, and at additional 
mailing offices. Canadian postage paid at Windsor, Ontario, Canada Post International 
Publications Mail, Product Sales Agreement No. 260657. POSTMASTER, send change of 
address to Asimov's Science Fiction, Box 5130, Harlan, IA 51593-5130. In Canada return to 
3255 Wyandotte Street East, Windsor, Ontario N8Y1E9. ISSN 1055-2146. GST 
#R123293128 























C' 


CHART YOUR TRAVELS! 

Record past & future trips! 
Stimulate a world of conver¬ 
sational interest. Savor the 
memories. Enjoy the excite¬ 
ment of planning 
your travels! 

Excellent for 
reference and 
charting business 
territories. 

All maps are in 
full color, framed 
and come with 
charting kit 
including map 
pins, charting ruler 
and marking pen. 

THREE SIZES AVAILABLE 

STANDARD 30” x 20” 

printed on heavy artcraft 
stock. Framed in rich 
walnut finish wood. 

Ready to hang. 

World or U S. $38.00 
(2 or more $35.00 each) 




\ l ' 

1 .#• 




DELUXE 33” x 22" map 
laminated with thick 
10-mil Poly-Mylar™ film. 
Surface can be wiped 
clean. Framed in rich 
walnut finish wood. 
Ready to hang. 

World or U.S. $49.50 
(2 or more $45.00 each) 


KINGSIZE 52" x 34" 

map laminated with thick 
10-mil Poly-Mylar™ film. 
Surface can be wiped 
clean. Framed in gold 
anodized aluminum. 

Easy to assemble. 

World or U.S. $99.50 
(2 or more $95.00 each) 


PERSONALIZED: Name hand lettered add $5 e? 
ADD $5 FOR SHIPPING & HANDLING 


VISA, M/C phone orders 

1 - 800 - 322 - 1866 ; 

In California (213) 965 9380 


MASTERCARD Check enclosed 


MONEY BACK GUARANTEE 













REFLECTIONS 


by Robert Silverberg 


MEMORIES OF A CURIOUS CHILDHOOD 


I am, like some of you, older than I 
used to be—old enough to re¬ 
member when science fiction 
magazines cost a quarter, and 
how to change a typewriter ribbon, 
and what Isaac Asimov looked like 
before he grew those side-whiskers. 
I’m old enough, I’m afraid, so that 
I’ve outlived most of my childhood 
schoolteachers, some of my childhood 
friends, even my college roommate. 

But one thing I haven’t outlived 
is my curiosity. Even now, I keep 
looking ahead, peering around cor¬ 
ners, eager to see what’s coming 
next. And it’s that quality of rest¬ 
less curiosity, or what remains of it 
in me, that keeps me (relatively) 
youthful of spirit. The powerful de¬ 
sire to know what next month will 
bring, or next year, or next centu¬ 
ry—to learn how things are going 
to turn out —is a better rejuvenat¬ 
ing tonic than Geritol. 

Of course, a lot of things that 
once mattered supremely to me I 
now don’t care about at all. Who 
wins this year’s National League 
pennant, for example, or even who 
wins this year’s Hugo for Best Sci¬ 
ence Fiction Novel. Talk to me 
about baseball next time we’re 
both in 1948, and I’ll go on and on 
about the great new Brooklyn 
Dodger players like Gil Hodges 
and Roy Campanella and Duke 
Snider, and what wonders they’ll 


accomplish next season. But these 
days the Dodgers play in L.A. and 
I don’t have a clue to who’s on first. 
As for Hugos, well, I still show up 
at the annual ceremony and I ap¬ 
plaud dutifully as my colleagues 
collect their shiny trophies, and 
when I win one myself, as happens 
now and then, I am quite sincerely 
delighted, but the old summertime 
fascination of speculating on the 
probable Labor Day winners no 
longer seems to be there for me. 

It’s a natural process, I guess, this 
ebbing of the curiosity-libido. Most 
of us past forty can’t manage to keep 
our waistlines where they were 
twenty years ago, our hair under¬ 
goes funny changes of color about 
the same time, and the mind begins 
to pull in some of its antennae too, I 
guess. But I have enough curiosity 
left in me, even now, to keep myself 
revved up about things to come. 

No matter what time I’ve gone to 
sleep the night before, I’m up at six 
the next morning without benefit of 
alarm clock, so avid am I to see 
what the new day will bring. I look 
forward impatiently to the morning 
mail, to the day’s telephone calls, to 
the unfolding of my day’s writing 
stint. I find myself wondering 
where I’ll have dinner that night— 
a Thai restaurant? Ethiopian? In¬ 
dian?—and what new and unfamil¬ 
iar things I’ll find on the menu. 


4 



It goes beyond that, of course. I 
want to last long enough to find out 
what it will feel like to date a letter 
“January 4, 2001.” I want to hang 
in there until the exploration of 
space starts up again, so I can hear 
astronauts describing their jaunts 
across the sands of Mars. I want to 
be around when the Chinese final¬ 
ly excavate the gigantic mound 
that covers the tomb of the Emper¬ 
or Ch’in Shi Huang Ti. And I have 
all sorts of travel plans in mind— 
Australia, Portugal, the Galapagos 
Islands, the heights of Macchu Pic- 
chu, the reconstructed museums of 
reunited Berlin, a list that goes on 
and on into my dotage. 

It’s a healthy thing, curiosity. 
I’ve had an acute case of it ever 
since I was a boy. 

What an annoying little brat I 
was! When I was in the first grade 
I discovered by reading the printed 
warning on its side that one must 
not, under any circumstances, take 
the fire extinguisher down from the 
corridor wall and turn it upside 
down. Why not? I wondered. What 
would happen? So I took it down 
and turned it over. Foam, of course, 
came shooting out in wondrous 
abundance, and teachers came run¬ 
ning from all directions. “Well, I 
wanted to know what would hap¬ 
pen,” I told them. If they were 
amused by my precocious inquisi¬ 
tiveness, they kept it well hidden. 

Somehow, a year later, I became 
fascinated by eels—by the idea that 
certain fishes looked very much 
like snakes. Snakes interested me. 
So did snails, and frogs, and just 
about everything else. A fish that 



Reflections: Memories of o Curious Childhood 


5 











February 1997 


looked like a snake was irresistible. 
So I asked Mr. Brenner, the good- 
natured man who ran the fish mar¬ 
ket on the corner, to get a live eel 
for me. (In those days we knew all 
the local market proprietors by 
name, the grocer and the baker and 
the fish man, and we called them 
“Mr.” this and that, not “Sid” or 
“Jose”) I was much more extrovert¬ 
ed and outgoing then than I later 
became, and a lot of people were 
charmed by the way I went around 
poking my nose into their business. 
Mr. Brenner, God only knows why, 
promised to get me an eel. 

And he did. He called me into the 
store a few days later and handed 
me a big whonking brown eel in a 
huge jar, and I carried it home and 
(since I had no fish tank) put it into 
the bathtub. We had only one tub to 
serve the whole family, and turning 
it into an eel-tank would very 
quickly have caused some house¬ 
hold inconvenience, but I suppose 
that when you’re seven you’re bet¬ 
ter at expressing curiosity than you 
are at thinking about consequences. 

My mother, a third-grade teacher, 
came home from school a little while 
later and found a live eel in our 
bathtub. This was over fifty years 
ago and I don’t quite recall her reac¬ 
tion—but, though she had had plen¬ 
ty of opportunity to watch me in ac¬ 
tion by this time, it was probably 
less calm than a simple, straightfor¬ 
ward “Robert, why is there an eel in 
the bathtub?” I do remember that 
the eel went back to Mr. Brenner 
very quickly and that there was a 
lively discussion when my father got 
home an hour or two later. 

6 


I had a microscope, of course. 
When I heard that the brine from 
pickle-barrels contained interest¬ 
ing microorganisms, I went across 
the street to Mr. Cohen’s grocery 
store and asked for some pickle 
brine. When I explained why I 
wanted it, he gave me a pickle too. 
Coming home with the brine 
caused less fuss than coming home 
with the eel had created. 

I saw the man who ran the laun¬ 
dry—I don’t remember his name— 
reading a Chinese newspaper. I 
asked him for a copy and he gave 
me one and I spent an hour trying 
to figure out how to read Chinese. 
Languages interested me: at eight, 
I had already learned a few words 
of Spanish and a bit of French. Got 
nowhere with Chinese, but it was 
instructive to see how rich and vari¬ 
ous one planet’s languages could be. 

In 1944 someone gave me a sub¬ 
scription to the National Geograph¬ 
ic —I get it to this day—and in¬ 
stantly I yearned to see with my 
own eyes all the places in those 
wondrous photographs, where 
bizarre creatures dwelled, where 
alien architecture brightened the 
landscape. I longed to climb the 
Pyramids and trek the Gobi and 
stare up at the redwood trees of 
California. Coral reefs, rain forests, 
geysers, volcanoes, Mayan jungle 
temples, the dunes of the Sahara, 
the cactus forests of Mexico—so 
long as it was something qualita¬ 
tively different from Brooklyn, 
N.Y., I wanted to see it. It was 
wartime, then, and nobody went 
anywhere except with government 
permission; but I have diligently 

Robert Silverberg 




A Gilt They'll Enjoy All Year! 

Share (he excitement of new worlds when you give 
a gift subscription to Asimov’s Science Fiction! 

We’ll send 12 issues filled with imaginative stories 
flora the best science fiction writers of today for 
just $27.97, You save more than 20%! 


To charge vour order bv phone, call toll-free: 

1 - 800 - 333-4108 

Mail to: Asimov's, P.0. Box 5130, Marian, IA 51593 


□ Payment enclosed 
From: 


□ liill me 



spent my adult life searching out 
those myriad places which, back 
then, I was able to visit only vicari¬ 
ously, via the National Geographic. 

But the Geographic wasn’t 
enough.. The same intellectual 
hunger that led me to turn over 
fire-extinguishers, bring home 
eels, peer into microscopes, and 
ponder the laundryman’s incom¬ 
prehensible newspaper caused me 
to turn my attention to ever more 
distant places and eras—other 
worlds, other epochs. I wanted to 
make great swooping journeys in 
space and time. My mind boiled 
with questions. What were the di¬ 
nosaurs really like? Would we ever 
go to Mars, and if we did, what 
would we find there? And the plan¬ 
ets of other stars: were they any¬ 
thing like the ones I saw depicted 


in Planet Comics and the Buck 
Rogers newspaper strips? 

Ah, that was frustrating! I could 
never hope to go on journeys to the 
Mesozoic; and as for the glorious 
ray-gun and spaceship future 
shown in the comics, I knew even 
then that I would live to see only a 
small segment of it, a short way 
into the twenty-first century at the 
very best. 

But then I stumbled on science 
fiction. It was a handy substitute for 
the fulfillment of those impossible 
curiosities of |pine. John Taine’s 
novel Before the Dawn was as good 
an eye-witness account of the di¬ 
nosaurs as I could hope to have, and 
H.G. Wells’s The Time Machine 
showed me the eons to come in 
40,000 astonishing words; and soon 
I found the SF magazines, too, 


Reflections; Memories of a Curious Childhood 


7 













February 1997 


where writers named Heinlein and 
Asimov and Williamson and van 
Vogt were depicting the future for 
me in fictional form with such vivid¬ 
ness and clarity that I could almost 
believe I was there. Such magazines 
as Astounding Science Fiction and 
Startling Stories became the Na¬ 
tional Geographic of this next phase 
of my intellectual development. 

“He had never seen a humanoid,” 
Jack Williamson wrote, in a classic 
story published in 1947. “Smaller 
and slimmer than a man. A shin¬ 
ing black, its sleek silicone skin 
had a changing sheen of bronze 
and metallic blue. Its graceful oval 
face wore a fixed look of alert and 
slightly surprised solicitude. Alto¬ 
gether, it was the most beautiful 
mechanical he had ever seen.” 

And a door opened for me, and I 


was in the rhodomagnetic future of 
“With Folded Hands,” and for the 
next hour my curiosity about what 
the world of two or three hundred 
years hence was going to be like 
was satisfied. I knew. I was there. 
Jack Williamson had taken me 
there. Science fiction, for the mo¬ 
ment, had soothed my need to peer 
into the impossible-to-attain worlds 
beyond my own probable lifespan. 

You understand. You’ve had the 
same experience, or you wouldn’t 
be reading this magazine. 

That overriding curiosity that 
never lets up—that hunger to get 
answers to the most audacious 
questions—I’ve always had it, and 
I have it still, though I don’t bring 
live eels home anymore. You have 
it too. And, I’m willing to bet, have 
eel stories of your own to tell. • 



8 


Robert Silverberg 









The Croat American Train Adventure... 

A thrilling .‘{.200-milc trip from Washington D.C. t(» San Francisco 

America the Beautiful. Sec it the best possible way,..Close-up. friendly, full of 
intriguing surprises. And the scenery... You must experience it to believe it! 
FASCINATING PEOPLE AN1) PLACES. It's the dream vacation of a life¬ 
time as Amtrak's Capitol Limited pulls out of Washington’s historic Union Station 
and heads west to Chicago. In an ever-changing panorama you pass through the 
heartland of America... lush farmlands, picturesque mountain areas, legendary rail¬ 
road cities, tiny whistleslop towns. In the Windy City you board the fabled 
California Zephyr for a sightseeing trip of truly amazing beauty and variety. 
MAGNIFICENT MOUNTAIN SCENERY, Enjoy a delicious lunch in 
ning car. then lake a seal in the glass-domed sightseeing luunge. Gasp in awe at the snow-capped 
tains, the rushing streams, the scampering deer, as the Zephyr crosses the Rockies and the Sierras. 


rid^a^laking^mc^tuly exhiLmiiing^ridfas.^The’ strashurg"Rnilwml rEhrough the charming Amish region of 
Pennsylvania. The Potomac Eagle Train visits the nesting areas of the bald eagle. In Iowa the Boone & Scenic Valiev 

Ra.l.,ud chugs over lug.-slles and ..resale ... valley. ..A,/.. the V.,u 

Valley WjneTtain .and so much nine, l ull .. ridvo is appo.s ’In long .111-11.\Y MOM.Y HACK (It ARAM Ilf. 

Kindly rush my AMERICA BY RAIL Video (s) on 30-day money back guarantee. (VHS c 


.. 








LETTERS 


Greetings: 

After more than fifteen years as 
a faithful subscriber, I am writing 
my first letter. I was tempted to 
write after Isaac Asimov’s death 
but was too traumatized by the 
loss of one of my favorite authors, 
not only of science fiction and sci¬ 
ence, but across the literary spec¬ 
trum. 

I simply loved the way this man 
thought and wrote about every¬ 
thing. In fact, for my birthday to¬ 
day, I received, Yours, Isaac Asi¬ 
mov, the collection of letters 
compiled by his younger brother, 
and have ordered Asimov Laughs 
Again, the final section of his auto- 
biography. I don’t have all his 
books but I have close to a hun¬ 
dred. 

I worried for awhile that his 
magazine might not survive his 
death. Although there was an obvi¬ 
ous and understandable adjust¬ 
ment period, the magazine has re¬ 
covered. I believe it was essential 
to continue with a regular editorial 
and Robert Silverberg has fulfilled 
that space admirably. I am disap¬ 
pointed that the “Letters” section 
has not been maintained consis¬ 
tently although I concede I miss 
Dr. Asimov’s concise and often hu¬ 
morous responses. 

As I am a voracious reader with 
eclectic taste, I have no problem 


with the type of stories you publish 
as long as they are the best quality 
possible and this standard has 
been upheld since the good Doc¬ 
tor’s death. 

I look forward to the day when 
some astute publisher offers for 
sale a collection of Isaac Asimov’s 
editorials from all sources, includ¬ 
ing this magazine. 

I wish everyone involved good 
health and good fortune as you 
continue to produce one of Dr. Asi¬ 
mov’s lasting memorials. Thank 
you for many years of excellent 
reading. 

Sincerely, 

Ted Jacobsen 
Glouster, ON 
Canada 

Dear Editor, 

I’ve been a subscriber for many 
years. Enjoy the magazine! 

This is my first letter. I’d like to 
compliment you and artist Wojtek 
Siudmak on the magnificent cover 
on the May 1996 issue. This makes 
me think of a 1990’s Virgil Finley. 
I am very impressed with Mr. 
Siudmak’s work. 

Good luck, 

Charles G. Baird 
Watervliet, NY 

Dear Editors, 

My praise for “The Age of Aquar- 


10 



Asimov's 


ius” by William Barton in the May 
Asimov’s. I remember well the ef¬ 
fect the Cuban Missile Crisis had 
on my eleven-year-old view of the 
world as I watched my parents 
talk seriously about Nuclear War. 
A fine “what if” tale that causes 
one to view history with more in¬ 
terest. More from Mr. Barton 
would be appreciated. 

I have read Asimov’s since the 
days of the great label-removing 
wars ’81-’83. I am always im¬ 
pressed at how very good the writ¬ 
ing is—this clearly reflects high 
quality editorial work. 

Thank you. 

Mitchell Edelstein 
Bethesda, MD 

Dear Mr. Dozois, 

Kudos to all parties concerned 
for the May ’96 issue of Asimov’s! 
From cover to cover, it was a de¬ 
light. In all my years of subscrib¬ 
ing to your magazine, I’ve never 
before seen an issue where every 
piece was an unqualified joy to 
read. 

Mr. Silverberg’s ruminations 
about ‘The Dinosaur in the Living 
Room” made me laugh out loud. 
Mr. Barton’s “Age of Aquarius" 
scared the socks off me, thinking 
about what might have been. Bra¬ 
vo to Ms. What for “The Goddess is 
Alive and Well, Living in New 
York City,” another laugh-riot. 
‘The Dog’s Story” by Ms. Arnason 
was a beautifully crafted visit to a 
favorite genre. I wish I’d had an 
uncle like the one portrayed in Mr. 
Utley’s “Silurian Tale.” 

And finally oh, golly, Mr. McDe- 


vitt’s “Time Travelers Never 
Die”—what a page-turner! Well- 
developed characters and a thor¬ 
oughly satisfying wild ride through 
history. 

It’s a shame four of these will be 
competing against each other in 
the Short Story/Novelettes cate¬ 
gories when the awards come 
around, because in my opinion, 
they are ALL winners. This issue I 
will keep forever! 

Thank you for putting it all to¬ 
gether for us. 

Sincerely, 

Carol Mueller 
Austin, TX 

Dear Mr. Di Filippo: 

Arthur C. Clarke has said and 
written many memorable things, 
but in your book review column in 
the June issue of Asimov’s you at¬ 
tribute to him, by allusion, what I 
like to call “Haldane’s Suspicion.” 
(There are so many Laws, Theo¬ 
rems. and Conjectures, but this 
one provides its own unique noun.) 
It was the British geneticist J.B.S. 
Haldane who said, “I suspect that 
the universe is not only stranger 
than we imagine, but stranger 
than we can imagine.” I may, just 
possibly, be a word or two off from 
the exact text, but I am certain of 
its creator. 

Sincerely, 

Mark A. Mandel 
Framingham, MA 

Dear Editors and Readers: 

I have never written to a maga¬ 
zine before but felt so much won¬ 
der at George R. It. Martin’s story 


Letters 


11 


February 1997 

“Blood of the Dragon,” in your July 
issue, that I just had to. I’ve al¬ 
ways loved Martin’s stories and 
this was no exception! He really 
made the characters come alive for 
me. Please thank him for his won¬ 
derful gift of writing. 

I also want to tell you that I love 
your magazine and am so pleased 
that it is available in Braille. I’ve 
been a reader for quite a few years 
and will keep on reading as long as 
the magazine keeps being pro¬ 
duced in a format that a blind per¬ 
son can read. 

Have a long and happy life, Asi¬ 
mov’s Science Fiction magazine! 
Sincerely, 

Lisa Warner 
Albany, NY 

Anyone who wishes to corre¬ 
spond with me, can e-mail me at 
lwarner@capital.net. 

Dear Mr. Silverberg, 

As a bit of a language purist my¬ 
self, I appreciated your August 
1996 Reflections on the evolution 
of our language through strange 
mutations that survive to repro¬ 
duce. You used a term in passing 
that is also in the process of losing 
its original meaning—“coin” as in 
“to frame or invent a new word or 
phrase” {OED}. These days the 
saying “to coin a phrase,” rather 
than claiming originality, is fre¬ 
quently used to mean “to quote a 
phrase.” Another odd mutation is 
the misuse of the word “tact” in the 
expression “taking a new tact.” 
The idea of changing sailing direc¬ 
tion by “tacking” has been merged 
with the notion of changing “tac¬ 


tics” to produce this odd hybrid. 

As the mother of a three-year- 
old dinophile, I loved Mary A. 
Turzillo’s dinosaur poem. Perhaps 
the four footed furry friends in our 
house are descendants of Pur- 
ringsaurolopuss and Prontocoun- 
tertops. 

Elizabeth Coley 
From the Internet 

Dear Gardner, 

Le Guin’s “Mountain Ways” in 
the August 1996 edition was my 
first encounter with the planet O. 
Nonetheless, I felt quite at home 
there, as though the inhabitants’ 
prejudices were mine, and their 
strange four-way marriage quite 
normal, after all. What was most 
interesting about the story, I 
thought, was the way in which it 
addressed the issue of forbidden 
sexual relations. For the existence 
of such forbidden alliances, Le 
Guin seemed to say, was a necessi¬ 
ty to any human culture. Skirting 
around them, finding a relation¬ 
ship partly forbidden, and yet not 
utterly sacrilegious, seemed to be 
the key here. Following social 
norms entirely would be the death 
of these characters. And yet, they 
must follow them, too. Or else 
cease to be human. Or part of hu¬ 
manity at large, anyway. 

Terry Bisson’s “The Edge of the 
Universe,” was as humorous as 
“The Hole in the Hole.” I admit, I 
was dubious that he could pull it 
off—yet again. “The Hole in the 
Hole” was superb, but surely a 
one-time thing. To push that suc¬ 
cess to the limit was a sad thing. 


12 


Letters 


Asimov's 


Only here, it wasn’t sad at all. Just 
fun—and with a touching element 
of truth. Everything does seem to 
go wrong just when we want to go 
right. And if reversing entropy 
could ever be wrong—Bisson shows 
how here. 

I found that the biting humor of 
Hast’s “Earth: Your Toxic Dream 
Vacation” worked quite well. I felt 
something was missing, however, 
in that there were no real charac¬ 
ters. The voice of the advertiser, of 
course, but we never know much 
about him, except the face he (now 
why do I assume that it is a he?) 
puts on here. 

Finally, “Counting Cats in Zanz¬ 
ibar” was a variation on an old 
theme of Asimov’s, which is surely 
appropriate for your magazine. It 
kept me guessing almost until the 
very end. And then I asked myself, 
“would a robot be that gullible?” 
Would he guess more or less easily 
than a human? But maybe experi¬ 
ence is the only teacher there, and 
that is the one thing a robot of 
three years could not have. 

All in all, an outstanding issue. 
Thank you. 

Sincerely, 

Mette Ivie Harrison 
Provo, UT 

Dear Mr. Silverberg, 

My compliments to you and all 
at Asimov’s for a very fine maga¬ 
zine, and to you, sir, for years of ex¬ 
cellent fact and fiction. I write in 
response to your Reflections col¬ 
umn in the August ’96 issue, 
“Gourmet to Go.” My most sincere 
and heartfelt sympathies to your¬ 


self and anyone hoping to commu¬ 
nicate effectively, as words become 
more mangled in their use daily. 
My first example came as a small 
child when, hoping to impress my 
father with my vocabulary, I told 
him a business idea he’d expressed 
over dinner would be very “ludi¬ 
crous.” I’d meant “lucrative,” and 
the embarrassment I felt then still 
fuels my ire over people warping 
the language into their own appli¬ 
cations. While I am aware that 
English has always been a night¬ 
mare to learn, having borrowed 
from so many other languages and 
giving us such marvelous syn¬ 
onyms as “flammable” and “in¬ 
flammable” (and that bastard 
cousin, “irregardless”), I have 
known people to simply make up 
their own words at will. My most 
memorable comes from working at 
a defense contractor who operated 
a test known as “Voltage in Air,” 
which consisted of (you guessed it) 
hanging an item in the air and ap¬ 
plying high voltage. You might ex¬ 
pect an aerospace company to be 
populated with nerds to whom 
technical jargon is an intimate ac¬ 
quaintance. Not so here, for even 
the engineers tended to call this 
test the “voljinaire test”! (Perhaps 
a side effect of Legionnaire’s dis¬ 
ease?) 

I do not have the best vocabu¬ 
lary, nor do I know my Latin or 
much of any language other than 
English; my knowledge is hardly 
authoritative. But I fervently wish 
that people would take more delib¬ 
erate care with the words they use. 
It disturbs me to think that people, 


Letters 


13 


February 1997 

above all the other impediments to 
understanding each other, actively 
contribute to the problem. Thank 
you for all your engaging and en¬ 
tertaining columns, and I hope for 
many more. 

Sincerely, 

Bob Volk 
Syracuse, NY 

Knowing something about the de¬ 
rivation of words helps us to use 
them correctly. You would never 
have confused “ludicrous” with “lu¬ 
crative” if your six-year-old self had 
been aware that the Latin word lud- 
ere means "to play”and lucrum 
means “gain”or “profit.” The two 
most useful subjects I took in high 
school were Latin and typing. 

—Robert Silverberg 

Dear Mr. Silverberg, 

I liked your article, “Gourmet to 
Go.” I usually get a chuckle from 
your articles, and always get some¬ 
thing to think about. Thank you, 
and keep writing. 

One reason that I can think of 
for “penultimate” being miscon¬ 
strued to be better than “ultimate” 
is the similarity to the word “pen- 
dragon.” “Penultimate,” as you 
pointed out, comes from Latin 
roots, meaning “Almost-Last.” 
“Pendragon,” however, comes from 
Welsh roots, and means “Chief- 
Leader” or “High-King.” The Latin 
derivation would mean “Almost a 
Serpent.” With the recent rise in 
popularity of the Arthurian leg¬ 
ends, the Welsh meaning has be¬ 


come fairly well known. So, putting 
the Welsh “pen-” on the Latin “ulti¬ 
mate” gives you “Chief-Last 
Thing.” Which is certainly more 
impressive sounding than a simple 
“Last Thing.” 

On the topic of the misuse and 
abuse of language, here is a poem 
that should be pronounced as if it 
were Latin, but listened to in Eng¬ 
lish. 

O Sibili, se ergo, 

Fortebus es inero. 

O Nobili, demis trux 
Si vatsinum, causan dux. 

— anonymous (really, it wasn’t 
me!) 

Jesse Chisholm 
From the Internet 

Forty buses in a row, yes. An an¬ 
cient spoof and still a good one. As 
for “penultimate.” I doubt that Pen- 
dragon has anything to do with it. 
People just think “penultimate” 
sounds even more ultimate than 
“ultimate."But it’s derived from a 
perfectly good Latin word with no 
Celtic antecedents whatever. 

—Robert Silverberg 


CORRECTION: 

"The City of God," Gard¬ 
ner Dozois and Michael Swan- 
wick's October/November 
novella, omitted its credit 
line: The story was first pub¬ 
lished on Omni Online in 
December 1995. 


14 


Letters 



mmimmimimm 


LOVE BITE 


Will your mommy get mad if 
I give you a little love bite 
she giggled as she kissed me 
hard on my mouth and my cheeks 
my forehead my chin 
neck nose 

her teeth nipping everywhere 
cold and sharp 
My mommy's dead I said 
marveling at the glow of 
her death-pale cheeks 
searching for the sparkle of life 
missing from her bottomless eyes 
knowing that I never would 
and that in the end 
it wouldn't matter anyway 
I know she said 

and the giggle became a cackle 

then a jungle roar spilled 

from her ever-bloodier mouth 

and I watched the tiny drops 

as their garnet gleam faded 

as they dried and died 

seeping into the wrinkles of her lips 

I love you I said 

and laughed because 

I didn't really love her 

so much as I loved what she was 

and I panted as my blood raced 

at the thought of what 

she would help me become 

—Jenna A. Felice 








Robert Silverberg's enthralling new drama splendidly evokes the work of 
another much-honored SF author. "Call Me Titan" was written in memory 
of Roger Zelazny, and it is a "conscious effort to use his manner and 
themes." We think Mr. Silverberg's tribute is a stunning success. 


Robert Silverberg 




February 1997 

ff 11 ow did you get loose?” the woman who was Aphrodite asked me. 

U “It happened. Here I am.” 

n “Yes,” she said. “You. Of all of them, you. In this lovely place.” She 

11 waved at the shining sun-bright sea, the glittering white stripe of 
the beach, the whitewashed houses, the bare brown hills. A lovely place, 
yes, this isle of Mykonos. “And what are you going to do now?” 

“What I was created to do,” I told her. “You know.” 

She considered that. We were drinking ouzo on the rocks, on the hotel 
patio, beneath a hanging array of fishermen’s nets. After a moment she 
laughed, that irresistible tinkling laugh of hers, and clinked her glass 
against mine. 

“Lots of luck,” she said. 

That was Greece. Before that was Sicily, and the mountain, and the 
eruption.... 

The mountain had trembled and shaken and belched, and the red 
streams of molten fire began to flow downward from the ashen top, and 
in the first ten minutes of the eruption six little towns around the slopes 
were wiped out. It happened just that fast. They shouldn’t have been 
there, but they were, and then they weren’t. Too bad for them. But it’s al¬ 
ways a mistake to buy real estate on Mount Etna. 

The lava was really rolling. It would reach the city of Catania in a cou¬ 
ple of hours and take out its whole northeastern quarter, and all of Sicily 
would be in mourning the next day. Some eruption. The biggest of all 
time, on this island where big eruptions have been making the news 
since the dinosaur days. 

As for me, I couldn’t be sure what was happening up there at the 
summit, not yet. I was still down deep, way down, three miles from sun¬ 
light. 

But in my jail cell down there beneath the roots of the giant volcano 
that is called Mount Etna I could tell from the shaking and the noise and 
the heat that this one was something special. That the prophesied Hour 
of Liberation had come round at last for me, after five hundred centuries 
as the prisoner of Zeus. 

I stretched and turned and rolled over, and sat up for the first time in 
fifty thousand years. 

Nothing was pressing down on me. 

Ugly limping Hephaestus, my jailer, had set up his forge right on top 
of me long ago, his heavy anvils on my back. And had merrily hammered 
bronze and iron all day and all night for all he was worth, that clomp- 
legged old master craftsman. Where was Hephaestus now? Where were 
his anvils? 

Not on me. Not any longer. 

That was good, that feeling of nothing pressing down. 


18 


Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 


I wriggled my shoulders. That took time. You have a lot of shoulders to 
wriggle, when you have a hundred heads, give or take three or four. 

“Hephaestus?” I yelled, yelling it out of a hundred mouths at once. I 
felt the mountain shivering and convulsing above me, and I knew that 
my voice alone was enough to make great slabs of it fall off and go tum¬ 
bling down, down, down. 

No answer from Hephaestus. No clangor of his forge, either. He just 
wasn’t there anymore. 

I tried again, a different, greater name. 

“Zeus?” 

Silence. 

“You hear me, Zeus?” 

No reply. 

“Where the hell are you? Where is everybody?” 

All was silence, except for the hellish roaring of the volcano. 

Well, okay, don’t answer me. Slowly I got to my feet, extending myself 
to my full considerable height. The fabric of the mountain gave way for 
me. I have that little trick. 

Another good feeling, that was, rising to an upright position. Do you 
know what it’s like, not being allowed to stand, not even once, for fifty 
thousand years? But of course you don’t, little ones. How could you? 

One more try. “ZEUS???” 

All my hundred voices crying his name at once, fortissimo fortissimo. 
A chorus of booming echoes. Every one of my heads had grown back, over 
the years. I was healed of all that Zeus had done to me. That was espe¬ 
cially good, knowing that I was healed. Things had looked really bad, for 
a while. 

Well, no sense just standing there and caterwauling, if nobody was go¬ 
ing to answer me back. This was the Hour of Liberation, after all. I was 
free—my chains fallen magically away, my heads all sprouted again. 
Time to get out of here. I started to move. 

Upward. Outward. 

I moved up through the mountain’s bulk as though it were so much air. 
The rock was nothing to me. Unimpeded I rose past the coiling internal 
chambers through which the lava was racing up toward the summit vent, 
and came out into the sunlight, and clambered up the snow-kissed slopes 
of the mountain to the ash-choked summit itself, and stood there right in 
the very center of the eruption as the volcano puked its blazing guts out. 
I grinned a hundred big grins on my hundred faces, with hot fierce winds 
swirling like swords around my head and torrents of lava flowing down 
all around me. The view from up there was terrific. And what a fine feel¬ 
ing that was, just looking around at the world again after all that time 
underground. 


Call Me Titan 


19 


February 1997 


There below me off to the east was the fish-swarming sea. Over there 
behind me, the serried tree-thickened hills. Above me, the fire-hearted 
sun. 

What beautiful sights they all were! 

“Hoo-/ia/”I cried. 

My jubilant roar went forth from that lofty mountaintop in Sicily like 
a hundred hurricanes at once. The noise of it broke windows in Rome 
and flattened farmhouses in Sardinia and knocked over ten mosques 
deep in the Tunisian Sahara. But the real blast was aimed eastward 
across the water, over toward Greece, and it went across that peninsula 
like a scythe, taking out half the treetops from Agios Nikolaus on the 
Ionian side to Athens over on the Aegean, and kept on going clear into 
Turkey. 

It was a little signal, so to speak. I was heading that way myself, with 
some very ancient scores to settle. 

I started down the mountainside, fast. The lava surging all around my 
thudding feet meant nothing to me. 

Call me Typhoeus. Call me Titan. 

I suppose I might have attracted a bit of attention as I made my way 
down those fiery slopes and past all the elegant seaside resorts that now 
were going crazy with hysteria over the eruption, and went striding into 
the sea midway between Fiumefreddo and Taormina. I am, after all, 
something of a monster, by your standards: four hundred feet high, let us 
say, with all those heads, dragon heads at that, and eyes that spurt 
flame, and thick black bristles everywhere on my body and swarms of 
coiling vipers sprouting from my thighs. The gods themselves have been 
known to turn and run at the mere sight of me. Some of them, once upon 
a time, fled all the way to Egypt when I yelled “Boo!” 

But perhaps the eruption and the associated earthquakes kept the peo¬ 
ple of eastern Sicily so very preoccupied just then that they didn’t take 
time to notice what sort of being it was that was walking down the side of 
Mount Etna and perambulating off toward the sea. Or maybe they didn’t 
believe their eyes. Or it could be that they simply nodded and said, “Sure. 
Why not?” 

I hit the water running and put my heads down and swam swiftly 
Greeceward across the cool blue sea without even bothering to come up 
for breath. What would have been the point? The air behind me smelled 
of fire and brimstone. And I was in a hurry. 

Zeus, I thought. I’m coming to get you, you bastard! 

As I said, I’m a Titan. It’s the family name, not a description. We Ti¬ 
tans were the race of Elder Gods—the first drafts, so to speak, for the 
deities that you people would eventually worship—the ones that Zeus 
walloped into oblivion long before Bill Gates came down from Mount 
Sinai with MS-DOS. Long before Homer sang. Long before the Flood. 

20 Robert Silverberg 


Civil War Journal 

TURNING POINTS IN THE WAR BETWEEN THE STATES- 


UP-CLOSE AND PERSONAL - 

First-Hand Accounts of Soldiers, Generals, Photographers, Diarists, 
President Lincoln, Mark Twain, and many more. 


NOW Bloodshed. Tears. Cheers of triumph. Cries of despair. Thoughts and 
ONLY dreams of home. Suddenly the years nave peeled away, and you are in the 
;■| Q95 midst of an incredible war between North and South. March with the raw 

recruits, some as young as sixteen although they claim to be older. Watch with 
awestruck farmers, as clashing armies turn their cornfields into battlefields. 
THE BATTLE OF ANTIETAM This is it- The bloodiest day in all of America's 
history . Ceneral Robert E. Lee crosses the Potomac River into Maryland and is 
eventually beaten back by Union forces. The cost? Some 23,000 dead and 
wounded, evenly divided between the two sides. A stunning security leak, the 
most astonishing in all of U.S. history, is revealed here. 

THE BATTLE OF CHARLESTON The firing upon 
Ft. Sumter in 1861, is the official beginning of the 
Civil War. The residents, genteel but gritty, learn 
to cope with Federal forces which hold Charleston 
under siege for years. The world’s first successful 
submarine attack. 

THE BATTLE OF NEW ORLEANS New Orleans, 
known far and wide as a center of glamour, excite¬ 
ment, and wickedness. Admiral Farragut seizes it 
in 1862. But the occupying troops find that the 
people—the ladies in particular-are surprisingly 
strong-willed and feisty. 

THE BATTLE OF VICKSBURG A series of awesome 
conflicts on land and water, General Sherman out- 
maneuvers the Confederates and Crant brings the 
city to its knees on the Fourth of July, 1863. 

— — —- , Listen to words from the diaries of housewives, the letters of soldiers, me 

_ . Epic Video, musings of Abraham Lincoln himself. Watch as the battles are reenacted 

r ascinoi & . with a great passion for accuracy. View rare photographs of this war; hca 

Ovet 3 Hours the fascinating comments of modern-day historians. 200 minutes in all, it has 

Heroism fiTurmori *“ .. 




L. VHS . 30-DAY MONEY BACK GUARANTEE 


Abigail’s Treasures, Dept, ddcw -2 . PO Box 66, Avon-by-the-Sca, NJ 07717 
FASTER SERVICE CALL (908) 280-9300 
Please send me my Civil War Vldeo(s) (Item #W787)on 30-day money back guarantee. VHS only. 


Enclosed is $_(NJ residents please add sales tax) t 

Abigail's Treasures. Charge to my; □ MasterCard DVi 

Account 0_ 

To help process order, you may wish to include your daytini 


□ American Express 
_ Exp. Date _ 














February 1997 


Long before, as a matter of fact, anything that might mean anything to 
you. 

Gaea was our mother. The Earth, in other words. The mother of us all, 
really. 

In the early days of the world broad-bosomed Gaea brought forth all 
sorts of gods and giants and monsters. Out of her came far-seeing 
Uranus, the sky, and then he and Gaea created the first dozen Titans, 
Oceanus and Cronus and Rhea and that bunch. 

The original twelve Titans spawned a lot of others: Atlas, who now 
holds up the world, and tricky Prometheus, who taught humans how to 
use fire and got himself the world’s worst case of cirrhosis for his trouble, 
and silly scatterbrained Epimetheus, who had that thing with Pandora, 
and so on. There were snake-limbed giants like Porphyrion and Alcy- 
oneus, and hundred-armed fifteen-headed beauties like Briareus and 
Cottus and Gyes, and other oversized folk like the three one-eyed Cy¬ 
clopes, Arges of the storms and Brontes of the thunder and Steropes of 
the lightning, and so on. Oh, what a crowd we were! 

The universe was our oyster, so I’m told. It must have been good times 
for all and sundry. I hadn’t been bom yet, in that era when Uranus was 
king. 

But very early on there was that nasty business between Uranus and 
his son Cronus, which ended very badly for Uranus, the bloody little deal 
with the sharp sickle, and Cronus became the top god for a while, until 
he made the mistake of letting Zeus get born. That was it, for Cronus. In 
this business you have to watch out for overambitious sons. Cronus 
tried—he swallowed each of his children as they were born, to keep them 
from doing to him what he had done to Uranus—but Zeus, the last-born, 
eluded him. Very unfortunate for Cronus. 

Family history. Dirty linen. 

As for Zeus, who as you can see showed up on the scene quite late but 
eventually came to be in charge of things, he’s my half-sister Rhea’s son, 
so I suppose you’d call him my nephew. I call him my nemesis. 

After Zeus had finished off Cronus he mopped up the rest of the Titans 
in a series of wild wars, thunderbolts ricocheting all over the place, the 
seas boiling, whole continents going up in flame. Some of us stayed neu¬ 
tral and some of us, I understand, actually allied themselves with him, 
but none of that made any difference. When all the shouting was over the 
whole pack of Titans were all prisoners in various disagreeable places, 
such as, for example, deep down underneath Mount Etna with the forge 
of Hephaestus sitting on your back; and Zeus and his outfit, Hades and 
Poseidon and Apollo and Aphrodite and the rest, ruled the roost. 

I was Gaea’s final experiment in maternity, the youngest of the Titans, 
born very late in the war with Zeus. Her final monster, some would say, 
because of my unusual looks and size. Tartarus was my father: the Un- 

22 Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 


derworld, he is. I was born restless. Dangerous, too. My job was to avenge 
the family against the outrages Zeus had perpetrated on the rest of us. I 
came pretty close, too. 

And now I was looking for my second chance. 

Greece had changed a lot since I last had seen it. Something called civ¬ 
ilization had happened in the meanwhile. Highways, gas stations, tele¬ 
phone poles, billboards, high-rise hotels, all those nice things. 

Still and all, it didn’t look so very bad. That killer blue sky with the 
golden blink in it, the bright sparkle of the low rolling surf, the white- 
walled cubes of houses climbing up the brown knifeblade hillsides: a 
handsome land, all things considered. 

I came ashore at the island of Zakynthos on the Peloponnesian coast. 
There was a pleasant waterfront town there with an old fortress on a hill¬ 
top and groves of olives and cypresses all around. The geological distur¬ 
bances connected with my escape from my prison cell beneath Mount 
Etna did not appear to have done much damage here. 

I decided that it was probably not a great idea to let myself be seen in 
my actual form, considering how monstrous I would look to mortal eyes 
and the complications that that would create for me. And so, as I ap¬ 
proached the land, I acquired a human body that I found swimming a 
short way off shore at one of the beachfront hotels. 

It was a serviceable, athletic he-body, a lean, trim one, not young but 
full of energy, craggy-faced, a long jaw and a long, sharp nose and a high 
forehead. I checked out his mind. Bright, sharp, observant. And packed 
with data, both standard and quirkily esoteric. All that stuff about Bill 
Gates and Homer and high-rises and telephone poles: I got that from 
him. And how to behave like a human being. And a whole lot more, all of 
which I suspected would be useful to acquire. 

A questing, creative mind. A good person. I liked him. I decided to use 
him. 

In half a wink I transformed myself into a simulacrum of him and went 
on up the beach into town, leaving him behind just as he had been, all 
unknowing. The duplication wouldn’t matter. Nobody was likely to care 
that there were two of him wandering around Greece at the same time, 
unless they saw both of us at the same moment, which wasn’t going to 
happen. 

I did a little further prowling behind his forehead and learned that he 
was a foreigner in Greece, a tourist. Married, three children, a house on 
a hillside in a dry country that looked a little like Greece, but was far 
away. Spoke a language called English, knew a smattering of other 
tongues. Not much Greek. That would be okay: I have my ways of com¬ 
municating. 

To get around the countryside properly, I discovered, I was going to 

Call Me Titan 23 


February 1997 

need land-clothing, money, and a passport. I took care of these matters. 
Details like those don’t pose problems for such as we. 

Then I went rummaging in his mind to see whether he had any infor¬ 
mation in there about the present whereabouts of Zeus. 

It was a very orderly mind. He had Zeus filed under “Greek Mytholo¬ 
gy-” 

Mythology ? 

Yes. Yes! He knew about Gaea, and Uranus, and the overthrow of 
Uranus by Cronus. He knew about the other Titans, at any rate some of 
them—Prometheus, Rhea, Hyperion, Iapetus. He knew some details 
about a few of the giants and miscellaneous hundred-armed monsters, 
and about the war between Zeus and the Titans and the Titans’ total 
downfall, and the takeover by the big guy and his associates, Poseidon 
and Apollo and Ares & Company. But these were all stories to him. Fa¬ 
bles. Mythology. 

I confess I looked in his well-stocked mental archives for myself, Ty- 
phoeus—even a Titan has some vanity, you know—but all I found was a 
reference that said, “Typhon, child of Hera, is often confused with the 
earlier Titan Typhoeus, son of Gaea and Tartarus.” 

Well, yes. The names are similar; but Typhon was the bloated she- 
dragon that Apollo slew at Delphi, and what does that have to do with 
me? 

That was bad, very bad, to show up in this copiously furnished mind 
only as a correction of an erroneous reference to someone else. Humiliat¬ 
ing, you might actually say. I am not as important as Cronus or Uranus 
in the scheme of things, I suppose, but I did have my hour of glory, that 
time I went up against Zeus single-handed and came very close to de¬ 
feating him. But what was even worse than such neglect, far worse, was 
to have the whole splendid swaggering tribe of us, from the great mother 
Gaea and her heavenly consort down to the merest satyr and wood- 
nymph, tucked away in there as so much mythology. 

What had happened to the world, and to its gods, while I lay writhing 
under Etna? 

Mount Olympus seemed a reasonable first place for me to go to look for 
some answers. 

I was at the absolute wrong end of Greece for that: down in the south¬ 
western corner, whereas Olympus is far up in the northeast. All decked 
out in my new human body and its new human clothes, I caught a hydro¬ 
foil ferry to Patra, on the mainland, and another ferry across the Gulf of 
Corinth to Nafpaktos, and then, by train and bus, made my way up to¬ 
ward Thessaly, where Olympus is. None of these places except Olympus 
itself had been there last time I was in Greece, nor were there such 
things as trains or ferries or buses then. But I’m adaptable. I am, after 
all, an immortal god. A sort of a god, anyway. 


24 


Robert Silverberg 




NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC VIDEO Presents: 
The Amazing World Of 

Cat 


Discover the secrets of 
their intriguing behavior on this 
fascinating, Beautifully filmed video! I 

. The body posture that reveals when a eat is about to “spring” A 

. Your cat’s secret alertness during a “cat nap" ‘x H 

• The jungle predator exposed in your cat’s play and games iff If 

• The keen hunter's sense that enables cats to stalk in the dark * 

. The elusive function of cats’ whiskers ''B'M’fSSs! WfNjW • f 

. The astonishing attributes that give cats “nine lives” and more! * * <0* ; ,*| p 

“lor thousands of years, cats have charmed us, delighted 
H us...and perplexed us. Have you ever wondered why cats always land on 
all four feet? Or what makes them purr? Or why they launch into a flurry 
of activity in the evening? Now, a fascinating video from National Geographic- 
answers the questions asked most —what makes cats behave the way they do? 

THRILL TO DRAMATIC FILM SEQUENCES 
Join wildlife experts from around the world as they unravel riddles that have mysti¬ 
fied cat lovers throughout the ages. Find out what few cat owners realize—within 
even the sweetest pussycat lurks the primal instincts of a lion, tiger, cougar or lynx. 
Thrill to dramatic film sequences that show how the behavior of your cat is never 
far removed from that of its cousins in the wild, even when at play. 

FIND OUT WHY CATS ACT THE WAY THEY DO 

Explore the intriguing relationship that has grown between cats and people. Adored and revered 
in ancient Egypt, feared and even persecuted in medieval times, inspiration to poets and 
painters, cats have never been more popular than today. Hear how the comforting companion¬ 
ship of a cat may even benefit our health, well-being and longevity. Sensational, one-of-a-kind 
video from National Geographic makes a delightful gift for any cat lover. VHS. 63 minutes. 


Abigail’s Treasures, Dept, dngc -2 , PO Box 66, Avon-by-the-Sea, NJ 07717 
FASTER SERVICE CALL (908) 280-9300 
Please send me my National Geographic’s “Cat” Video(s) (Item #W742) on 30-day money back 
guarantee. VHS only. 

Name_ 

Address_ 

City_ State_ Zip_ 

□ One Video for $19.95 plus $3.95 postage and handling. Total $23.90. 

□ Two Videos for only $38.00 plus $4.95 postage and handling. Total $42.95. 

Enclosed is $_(NJ residents please add sales lax) Make check or money order payable to 

Abigail's Treasures. Charge to my: □ MasleiCard □ Visa □ American Express 

Account #_ Exp. Date_ 

To help process order, you may wish to include your daytime phone number Please allow up to 4-6 

( )_sr"" 1 ' 
















February 1997 


It was interesting, sitting among you mortals in those buses and 
trains. I had never paid much attention to you in the old days, any more 
than I would give close attention to ants or bumblebees or cockroaches. 
Back there in the early ages of the world, humans were few and far be¬ 
tween, inconsequential experimental wildlife. Prometheus made you, you 
know, for some obscure reason of his own: made you out of assorted dirt 
and slime, and breathed life into you, and turned you loose to decorate 
the landscape. You certainly did a job of decorating it, didn’t you? 

Sitting there among you in those crowded garlicky trains, breathing 
your exhalations and smelling your sweat, I couldn’t help admiring the 
persistence and zeal with which you people had covered so much of the 
world with your houses, your highways, your shopping malls, your 
amusement parks, your stadiums, your power-transmission lines, and 
your garbage. Especially your garbage. Very few of these things could be 
considered any sort of an improvement over the basic virgin terrain, but 
I had to give you credit for effort, anyway. Prometheus, wherever he 
might be now, would surely be proud of you. 

But where was Prometheus? Still chained up on that mountaintop, 
with Zeus’ eagle gnawing away on his liver? 

I roamed the minds of my traveling companions, but they weren’t edu¬ 
cated people like the one I had chanced upon at that beach, and they 
knew zero about Prometheus. Or anybody else of my own era, for that 
matter, with the exception of Zeus and Apollo and Athena and a few of 
the other latecomer gods. Who also were mere mythology to them. Greece 
had different gods these days, it seemed. Someone called Christos had 
taken over here. Along with his father and his mother, and assorted less¬ 
er deities whose relation to the top ones was hard to figure out. 

Who were these new gods? Where had they come from? I was pleased 
by the thought that Zeus had been pushed aside by this Christos the way 
he had nudged old Cronus off the throne, but how had it happened? 
When? 

Would I find Christos living on top of Mount Olympus in Zeus’ old 
palace? 

Well, no. I very shortly discovered that nobody was living on top of 
Olympus at all. 

The place had lost none of its beauty, infested though modern-day 
Greece is by you and your kind. The enormous plateau on which the 
mountain stands is still unspoiled; and Olympus itself rises as ever in 
that great soaring sweep above the wild, desolate valley, the various 
summits forming a spectacular natural amphitheater and the upper tiers 
of rock splendidly shrouded by veils of cloud. 

There are some roads going up, now. In the foothills I hired a car and a 
driver to take me through the forests of chestnut and fir to a refuge hut 
two thirds of the way up that is used by climbers, and there I left my dri- 

26 Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 


ver, telling him I would go the rest of the way myself. He gave me a pe¬ 
culiar look, I suppose because I was wearing the wrong kind of clothing 
for climbing, and had no mountaineering equipment with me. 

When he was gone, I shed my borrowed human form and rose up once 
again taller than the tallest tree in the world, and gave myself a set of 
gorgeous black-feathered wings as well, and went wafting up into that 
region of clean, pure air where Zeus had once had his throne. 

No throne. No Zeus. 

My cousins the giants Otus and Ephialtes had piled Mount Pelion on 
top of Mount Ossa to get up here during the war of the gods, and were 
flung right back down again. But I had the place to myself, unchallenged. 
I hovered over the jagged fleece-kissed peaks of the ultimate summit, spi¬ 
raling down through the puffs of white cloud, ready for battle, but no bat¬ 
tle was offered me. 

“Zeus? Zeus?” 

Once I had stood against him hissing terror from my grim jaws, and my 
eyes flaring gorgon lightning that had sent his fellow gods packing in piss- 
pants terror. But Zeus had withstood me, then. He blasted me with siz¬ 
zling thunderbolts and seared me to an ash, and hurled me to rack and 
ruin; and jammed what was left of me down under Mount Etna amid 
rivers of fire, with the craftsman god Hephaestus piling the tools of his 
workshop all over me to hold me down, and there I lay for those fifty thou¬ 
sand years, muttering to myself, until I had healed enough to come forth. 

I was forth now, all right, and looking for a rematch. Etna had vomited 
rivers of fire all over the fair plains of Sicily, and I was loose upon the 
world; but where was my adversary? 

“Zeus!” I cried, into the emptiness. 

I tried the name of Christos, too, just to see if the new god would an¬ 
swer. No go. He wasn’t there either. Olympus was as stunning as ever, 
but nobody godly seemed to have any use for it these days. 

I flew back down to the Alpine Club shelter and turned myself back 
into the lean-shanked American tourist with the high forehead and the 
long nose. I think three hikers may have seen me make the transforma¬ 
tion, for as I started down the slope I came upon them standing slack- 
jawed and goggle-eyed, as motionless as though Medusa had smitten 
them into stone. 

“Hi, there, fellas,” I called to them. “Have a nice day!” 

They just gaped. I descended the fir-darkened mountainside to the 
deep-breasted valley, and just like any hungry mortal I ate dolmades and 
keftedes and moussaka in a little taverna I found down there, washing it 
down with a few kilos of retsina. And then, not so much like any mortal, 
I walked halfway across the country to Athens. It took me a goodly num¬ 
ber of days, resting only a few hours every night. The body I had copied 
was a fundamentally sturdy one, and of course I had bolstered it a little. 


Call Me Titan 


27 


February 1997 

A long walk, yes. But I was beginning to comprehend that there was no 
need for me to hurry, and I wanted to see the sights. 

Athens was a horror. It was the kingdom of Hades risen up to the sur¬ 
face of the world. Noise, congestion, all-around general grittiness, inde¬ 
scribable ugliness, everything in a miserable state of disrepair, and the 
air so thick with foul vapor that you could scratch your initials in it with 
your fingernails, if you had initials, if you had fingernails. 

I knew right away I wasn’t going to find any members of the old pan¬ 
theon in this town. No deity in his right mind would want to spend ten 
minutes here. But Athens is the city of Athena, and Athena is the god¬ 
dess of knowledge, and I thought there might be a possibility that some¬ 
where here in her city I would be able to learn how and why and when 
the assorted divinities of Greece had made the transition from omnipo¬ 
tence to mythology, and where I might find them (or at least the one I 
was looking for) now. 

I prowled the nightmare streets. Dust and sand and random blocks of 
concrete everywhere, rusting metal girders standing piled for no particu¬ 
lar reason by the side of the road, crumbling buildings. Traffic, frantic 
and fierce: what a mistake giving up the ox-cart had been! Cheap, tacky 
shops. Skinny, long-legged cats hissed at me. They knew what I was. I 
hissed right back. We understood each other, at least. 

Up on a hilltop in the middle of everything, a bunch of ruined marble 
temples. The Acropolis, that hilltop is, the highest and holiest place in 
town. The temples aren’t bad, as mortal buildings go, but in terrible 
shape, fallen columns scattered hither and yon, caryatids eroded to blurs 
by the air pollution. Why are you people such dreadful custodians of your 
own best works? 

I went up there to look around, thinking I might find some lurking god 
or demigod in town on a visit. I stood by the best of the tumble-down tem¬ 
ples, the one called the Parthenon, and listened to a little man with big 
eyeglasses who was telling a group of people who looked exactly like him 
how the building had looked when it was new and Athena was still in 
town. He spoke a language that my host body didn’t understand at all, 
but I made a few adjustments and comprehended. So many languages, 
you mortals! We all spoke the same language, and that was good enough 
for us; but we were only gods, I suppose. 

When he was through lecturing them about the Parthenon, the tour 
guide said, “Now we will visit the Sanctuary of Zeus. This way, please.” 

The Sanctuary of Zeus was just back of the Parthenon, but there real¬ 
ly wasn’t very much left of it. The tour guide did a little routine about 
Zeus as father of the gods, getting six facts out of every five wrong. 

“Let me tell you a few things about Zeus,” I wanted to say, but I didn’t. 
“How he used to cheat at cards, for instance. And the way he couldn’t 

28 Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 


keep his hands off young girls. Or, maybe, the way he bellowed and 
moaned the first time he and I fought, when I tangled him in the coils of 
my snakes and laid him low, and cut the tendons of his hands and feet to 
keep him from getting rambunctious, and locked him up in that cave in 
Cilicia.” 

I kept all that to myself. These people didn’t look like they’d care to 
hear any commentary from a stranger. Anyway, if I told that story I’d feel 
honor bound to go on and explain how that miserable sneak Hermes 
crept into the cave when I wasn’t looking and patched Zeus up—and then 
how, once Zeus was on his feet again, he came after me and let me have 
it with such a blast of lightning bolts that I was fried halfway to a crisp 
and wound up spending the next few epochs as a prisoner down there un¬ 
der Etna. 

A dispiriting place, the Acropolis. 

I went slinking down and over to the Plaka, which is the neighborhood 
in back of the ruins, for some lunch. Human bodies need to be fed again 
and again, all day long. Swordfish grilled on skewers with onions and 
tomatoes; more retsina; fruit and cheese. All right. Not bad. Then to the 
National Museum, a two-hour walk, sweat-sticky and dusty. Where I 
looked at broken statues and bought a guidebook that told me about the 
gods whose statues these were. Not even close to the actualities, any of 
them. Did they seriously think that brawny guy with the beard was Po¬ 
seidon? And the woman with the tin hat, Athena? And that blowhard— 
Zeus? Don’t make me laugh. Please. My laughter destroys whole cities. 

Nowhere in the whole museum were there any representations of Ti¬ 
tans. Just Zeus, Apollo, Aphrodite, Poseidon, and the rest of them, the ju¬ 
nior varsity, the whole mob of supplanters, over and over and over. It was 
as if we didn’t count at all in the historical record. 

That hurt. I was in one hell of a sour mood when I left the museum. 

There was a Temple of Olympian Zeus in town, the guidebook said, 
somewhere back in the vicinity of the Acropolis. I kept hoping that I 
would find some clue to Zeus’ present place of residence at one of the sites 
that once had been sacred to him. A vestige, a lingering whiff of divinity. 

But the Temple of Olympian Zeus was nothing but an incomplete set 
of ruined columns, and the only whiff I picked up there was the whiff of 
mortality and decay. And now it was getting dark and the body I was in¬ 
habiting was hungry again. Back to the Plaka; grilled meat, wine, a 
sweet pudding. 

Afterward, as I roamed the winding streets leading down to the newer 
part of the city with no special purpose in mind, a feeble voice out of a 
narrow alley said, in the native language of my host body, “Help! Oh, 
please, help!” 

I was not put into this world for the purpose of helping anyone. But the 
body that I had duplicated in order to get around in modern Greece was 


Call Me Titan 


29 


February 1997 


evidently the body of a kindly and responsible person, because his reflex¬ 
es took over instantly, and I found myself heading into that alleyway to 
see what aid I could render the person who was so piteously crying out. 

Deep in the shadows I saw someone—a woman, I realized—lying on 
the ground in what looked like a pool of blood. I went to her side and 
knelt by her, and she began to mutter something in a bleary way about 
being attacked and robbed. 

“Can you sit up?” I said, slipping my arm around her back. “It’ll be eas¬ 
ier for me to carry you if—” 

Then I felt a pair of hands grasping me by the shoulders, not gently, 
and something hard and sharp pressing against the middle of my back, 
and the supposedly bloodied and battered woman I was trying to help 
rolled deftly out of my grasp and stepped back without any trouble at all, 
and a disagreeable rasping voice at my left ear said quietly, “Just give us 
your wristwatch and your wallet and you won’t get hurt at all.” 

I was puzzled for a moment. I was still far from accustomed to human 
ways, and it was often necessary to peer into my host-mind to find out 
what was going on. 

Quickly, though, I came to understand that there was such a thing as 
crime in your world, and that some of it was being tried on me at this 
very moment. The woman in the alley was bait; I was the prey; two ac¬ 
complices had been lurking in the shadows. 

I suppose I could have given them my wristwatch and wallet without 
protest, and let them make their escape. What did a wristwatch mean to 
me? And I could create a thousand new wallets just like the one I had, 
which I had created also, after all. As for harm, they could do me none 
with their little knife. I had survived even the lightnings of Zeus. Per¬ 
haps I should have reacted with godlike indifference to their little at¬ 
tempt at mugging me. 

But it had been a long dreary discouraging day, and a hot one, too. The 
air was close and vile-smelling. Maybe I had allowed my host body to 
drink a little too much retsina with dinner. In any event, godlike indif¬ 
ference was not what I displayed just then. Mortal petulance was more 
like the appropriate term. 

“Behold me, fools,” I said. 

I let them see my true form. 

There I was before them, sky-high, mountainous, a horrendous gigan¬ 
tic figure of many heads and fiery eyes and thick black bristles and 
writhing viperish excrescences, a sight to make even gods quail. 

Of course, inasmuch as I’m taller than the tallest tree and appropri¬ 
ately wide, manifesting myself in such a narrow alleyway might have 
posed certain operational problems. But I have access to dimensions un¬ 
available to you, and I made room for myself there with the proper inter- 
penetrational configurations. Not that it mattered to the three muggers, 

30 Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 

because they were dead of shock the moment they saw me towering be¬ 
fore them. 

I raised my foot and ground them into the pavement like noxious ver¬ 
min. 

Then, in the twinkling of an eye, I was once more a slender, lithe, mid¬ 
dle-aged American tourist with thinning hair and a kindly smile, and 
there were three dark spots on the pavement of the alley, and that was 
that. 

It was, I admit, overkill, 

But I had had a trying day. In fact, I had had a trying fifty thousand 
years. 

Athens had been so hellish that it put me in mind of the authentic 
kingdom of Hades, and so that was my next destination, for I thought I 
might get some answers down there among the dead. It wasn’t much of a 
trip, not for me. I opened a vortex for myself and slipped downward and 
there right in front of me were the black poplars and willows of the Grove 
of Persephone, with Hades’ Gate just behind it. 

“Cerberus?” I called. “Here, doggy doggy doggy! Good Cerberus! Come 
say hello to Daddy!” 

Where was he, my lovely dog, my own sweet child? For I myself was 
the progenitor of the three-headed guardian of the gate of Hell, by virtue 
of my mating with my sister, Tartarus and Gaea’s scaly-tailed daughter 
Echidna. We made the Harpies too, did Echidna and I, and the Chimera, 
and Scylla, and also the Hydra, a whole gaudy gorgeous brood of mon¬ 
sters. But of all my children I was always most fond of Cerberus, for his 
loyalty. How I loved to see him come running toward me when I called! 
What pleasure I took in his serpent-bristled body, his voice like clanging 
bronze, his slavering jaws that dripped black venom! 

This day, though, I wandered dogless through the Underworld. There 
was no sign of Cerberus anywhere, no trace even of his glittering turds. 
Hell’s Gate stood open and the place was deserted. I saw nothing of 
Charon the boatman of the Styx, nor Hades and Queen Persephone, nor 
any members of their court, nor the spirits of the dead who should have 
been in residence here. An abandoned warehouse, dusty and empty. 
Quickly I fled toward the sunshine. 

The island of Delos was where I went next, looking for Apollo. Delos is, 
or was, his special island, and Apollo had always struck me as the 
coolest, most level-headed member of the Zeus bunch. Perhaps he had 
survived whatever astounding debacle it was that had swept the 
Olympian gods away. And, if so, maybe he could give me a clue to Zeus’ 
current location. 

Big surprise! I went to Delos, but no Apollo. 


Col! Me Titan 


31 


February 1997 

It was yet another dismal disillusioning journey through the tumble- 
down sadness that is Greece. This time I flew; not on handsome black- 
feathered wings, but on a clever machine, a metal tube called an air¬ 
plane, full of travelers looking more or less like me in my present form. It 
rose up out of Athens in a welter of sound and fury and took up a course 
high above the good old wine-dark sea, speckled with tawny archipela¬ 
gos, and in very short order came down on a small dry island to the 
south. This island was called Mykonos, and there I could buy myself pas¬ 
sage in one of the boats that made outings several times a day to nearby 
Delos. 

Delos was a dry rubble-field, strewn with fragments of temples, their 
columns mostly broken off close to the ground. Some marble lions were 
still intact, lean and vigilant, crouching on their hind legs. They looked 
hungry. But there wasn’t much else to see. The place had the parched 
gloom of death about it, the bleak aura of extinction. 

I returned to Mykonos on the lunchtime boat, and found myself lodg¬ 
ings in a hillside hotel a short distance outside the pretty little narrow- 
streeted shorefront town. I ordered some more mortal food and drank 
mortal drink. My borrowed body needed such things. 

It was on Mykonos that I met Aphrodite. 

Or, rather, she met me. 

I was sitting by myself, minding my own business, in the hotel’s out¬ 
door bar, which was situated on a cobblestoned patio bedecked with mo¬ 
saics and hung with nets and oars and other purported fishing artifacts. 
I was on my third ouzo of the hour, which possibly was a bit much for the 
capacities of the body I was using, and I was staring down the hillside 
pensively at, well, what I have to call the wine-dark sea. (Greece brings 
out the cliches in anyone. Why should I resist?) 

A magnificent long-legged full-bodied blonde woman came over to me 
and said, in a wonderfully throaty, husky voice, “New in town, sailor?” 

I stared at her, astounded. 

There was the unmistakable radiance of divinity about her. My Geiger 
counter of godliness was going clickity-clack, full blast. I should not have 
failed to pick up her emanations the moment I arrived on Mykonos. But I 
hadn’t, not until she was standing right next to me. She had picked up 
mine, though. 

“Who are you?” I blurted. 

“Won’t you ask a lady to sit down, even?” 

I jumped to my feet like a nervous schoolboy, hauled a deck chair 
scrapingly across and positioned it next to mine, and bowed her into it. 
Then I wigwagged for a waiter. “What do you want to drink?” I rasped. 
My throat was dry. Nervous schoolboy, yes, indeed. 

“I’ll have what you’re having.” 

“ Parakalo , ouzo on the rocks,” I told the waiter. 


32 


Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 


She had showers of golden hair tumbling to shoulder length, and cat¬ 
like yellow eyes, and full ripe lips that broke naturally into the warmest 
of smiles. The aroma that came from her was one of young wine and 
green fields at sunrise and swift-coursing streams, but also of lavender 
and summer heat, of night rain, of surging waves, of midnight winds. 

I knew I was consorting with the enemy. I didn’t care. 

“Which one are you?” I said again. 

“Guess.” 

“Aphrodite would be too obvious. You’re probably Ares, or Hephaestus, 
or Poseidon.” 

She laughed, a melodic cadenza of merriment that ran right through 
the scale and into the infra-voluptuous. “You give me too much credit for 
deviousness. But I like your way of thinking. Ares in drag, really? Posei¬ 
don with a close shave? Hephaestus with a blonde wig?” She leaned 
close. The fragrance of her took on hurricane intensity. “You were right 
the first time.” 

“Aphrodite.” 

“None other. I live in Los Angeles now. Taking a little holiday in the 
mother country. And you? You’re one of the old ones, aren’t you?” 

“How can you tell?” 

“The archaic emanation you give off. Something out of the pre- 
Olympian past.” She clinked the ice-cubes thoughtfully in her glass, took 
a long pull of the ouzo, stared me straight in the eyes. “Prometheus? 
Tethys?” I shook my head. “Someone of that clan, though. I thought all of 
you old ones were done for a long time ago. But there’s definitely a Titan 
vibe about you. Which one, I wonder? Most likely one of the really 
strange ones. Thaumas? Phorcys?” 

“Stranger than those,” I said. 

She took a few more guesses. Not even close. 

“Typhoeus,” I told her finally. 

We walked into town for dinner. People turned to look at us in the nar¬ 
row streets. At her, I mean. She was wearing a filmy orange sun-dress 
with nothing under it and when you were east of her on a westbound 
street you got quite a show. 

“You really don’t think that I’m going to find Zeus?” I asked her. 

“Let’s say you have your work cut out for you.” 

“Well, so be it. I have to find him.” 

“Why is that?” 

“It’s my job,” I said. “There’s nothing personal about it. I’m the desig¬ 
nated avenger. It’s my sole purpose in existence: to punish Zeus for his 
war against the children of Gaea. You know that.” 

‘The war’s been over a long time, Typhoeus. You might as well let by¬ 
gones be bygones. Anyway, it’s not as though Zeus got to enjoy his victo- 


Cali Me Titan 


33 


February 1997 


ry for long.” We were in the middle of the maze of narrow winding streets 
that is Mykonos Town. She pointed to a cheerful little restaurant called 
Catherine’s. “Let’s go in here. I ate here last night and it was pretty 
good.” 

We ordered a bottle of white wine. “I like the body you found for your¬ 
self,” she said. “Not particularly handsome, no, but pleasing. The eyes are 
especially nice. Warm and trustworthy, but also keen, penetrating.” 

I would not be drawn away from the main theme. “What happened to 
the Olympians?” I asked. 

“Died off, most of them. One by one. Of neglect. Starvation.” 

“Immortal gods don’t die.” 

“Some do, some don’t. You know that. Didn’t Argus of the Hundred 
Eyes kill your very own Echidna? And did she come back to life?” 

“But the major gods—” 

“Even if they don’t die, they can be forgotten, and the effect’s pretty 
much the same. While you were locked up under Etna, new gods came in. 
There wasn’t even a battle. They just moved in, and we had to move 
along. We disappeared entirely.” 

“So I’ve noticed.” 

‘Yes. Totally out of business. You’ve seen the shape our temples are in? 
Have you seen anybody putting out burnt offerings to us? No, no, it’s all 
over for us, the worship, the sacrifices. Has been for a long time. We went 
into exile, the whole kit and caboodle of us, scattered across the world. 
I’m sure a lot of us simply died, despite that theoretical immortality of 
ours. Some hung on, I suppose. But it’s a thousand years since the last 
time I saw any of them.” 

“Which ones did you see then?” 

“Apollo—he was getting gray and paunchy. And I caught sight of Her¬ 
mes, once—I think it was Hermes—slow and short-winded, and limping 
like Hephaestus.” 

“And Zeus?” I asked. ‘You never ran into him anywhere, after you all 
left Olympus?” 

“No. Never even once.” 

I pondered that. “So how did you manage to stay so healthy?” 

“I’m Aphrodite. The life-force. Beauty. Passion. Those things don’t go 
out of fashion for long. I’ve done all right for myself, over the years.” 

“Ah. Yes. Obviously you have.” 

The waitress fluttered around us. I was boiling with questions to ask 
Aphrodite, but it was time to order, and that was what we did. The usual 
Greek things, stuffed grape leaves, grilled fish, overcooked vegetables. 
Another bottle of wine. My head was pulsating. The restaurant was 
small, crowded, a whirlpool of noise. The nearness of Aphrodite was over¬ 
whelming. I felt dizzy. It was a surprisingly pleasant sensation. 

I said, after a time, “I’m convinced that Zeus is still around somewhere. 


34 


Robert Silverberg 


Asimov's 

I’m going to find him and this time I’m going to whip his ass and put him 
under Mount Etna.” 

“It’s amazing how much like a small boy an immortal being can be. 
Even one as huge and frightful as you.” 

My face turned hot. I said nothing. 

“Forget Zeus,” she urged. “Forget Typhoeus, too. Stay human. Eat, 
drink, be merry.” Her eyes were glistening. I felt as if I were falling for¬ 
ward, tumbling into the sweet chasm between her breasts. “We could 
take a trip together. I’d teach you how to enjoy yourself. How to enjoy me, 
too. Tell me: have you ever been in love?” 

“Echidna and I—” 

“Echidna! Yes! You and she got together and made a bunch of hideous 
monsters like yourselves, with too many heads and drooling fangs. I don’t 
mean Echidna. This is Earth, here and now. I’m a woman now and you’re 

“But Zeus—•” 

“Zeus,’’she said scornfully. She made the name of the Lord of Olympus 
sound like an obscenity. 

We finished eating and I paid the check and we went outside into the 
mild, breezy Mykonos night, strolling for fifteen or twenty minutes, 
winding up finally in a dark, deserted part of the town, a warehouse dis¬ 
trict down by the water, where the street was no more than five feet wide 
and empty shuttered buildings with whitewashed walls bordered us on 
both sides. 

She turned to me there and pulled me abruptly up against her. Her 
eyes were bright with mischief. Her lips sought mine. With a little hiss¬ 
ing sound she nudged me backward until I was leaning against a wall, 
and she was pressing me tight, and currents of energy that could have 
fried a continent were passing between us. I think there could have been 
no one, not man nor god, who would not have wanted to trade places with 
me just then. 

“Quickly! The hotel!” she whispered. 

“The hotel, yes.” 

We didn’t bother to walk. That would have taken too long. In a flash 
we vanished ourselves from that incomprehensible tangle of maze-like 
streets and reappeared in her room at our hotel, and from then to dawn 
she and I generated such a delirium of erotic force that the entire island 
shook and shivered with the glorious sturm and drang of it. We heaved 
and thrust and moaned and groaned, and rivers of sweat ran from our 
bodies and our hearts pounded and thundered and our eyes rolled in our 
heads from giddy exhaustion, for we allowed ourselves the luxury of mor¬ 
tal limitations for the sake of the mortal joy of transcending those limita¬ 
tions. But because we weren’t mortal we also had the option of renewing 
our strength whenever we had depleted it, and we exercised that option 


Call Me Titan 


35 


February 1997 


many a time before rosy-fingered dawn came tiptoeing up over the high- 
palisaded eastern walls. 

Naked, invisible to prying eyes, Aphrodite and I walked then hand in 
hand along the morning-shimmering strand of the fish-swarming sea, 
and she murmured to me of the places we would go, the things we would 
experience. 

‘The Taj Mahal,” she said. “And the summer palace at Udaipur. Perse- 
polis and Isfahan in springtime. Baalbek. Paris, of course. Carcassonne. 
Iguazu Falls, and the Blue Mosque, and the Fountains of the Blue Nile. 
We’ll make love in the Villa of Tiberius on Capri—and between the paws 
of the Sphinx—and in the snow on top of Mount Everest—” 

“Yes,” I said. “Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes.” 

And what I was thinking was, Zeus. Zeus. Zeus. Zeus. 

And so we travel about the world together, Aphrodite and I, seeing the 
things in it that are beautiful, and there are many of those; and so she 
distracts me from my true task. For the time being. It is very pleasant, 
traveling with Aphrodite; and so I permit myself to be distracted this 
way. 

But I have not forgotten my purpose. And this is my warning to the 
world. 

I am a restless being, a mighty thrusting force. I was created that way. 
My adversary doesn’t seem currently to be around. But Zeus is here 
somewhere. I know he is. He wears a mask. He disguises himself as a 
mortal, either because it amuses him to do so, or because he has no 
choice, for there is something in the world of which he is afraid, some¬ 
thing from which he must hide himself, some god greater even than Zeus, 
as Zeus was greater than Cronus and Cronus was greater than Uranus. 

But I will find him. And when I do, I will drop this body and take on 
my own form again. I will stand mountain-high, and you will see my hun¬ 
dred heads, and my fires will flash and rage. And Zeus and I will enter 
into combat once more, and this time I will surely win. 

It will happen. 

I promise you that, O small ones. I warn you. It will happen. 

You will tremble then. I’m sorry for that. The mind that came with this 
body I wear now has taught me something about compassion; and so I re¬ 
gret the destruction I will inevitably visit upon you, because it cannot be 
avoided, when Zeus and I enter into our struggle. You have my sincerest 
apologies, in advance. Protect yourselves as best you can. But for me 
there can be no turning away from my task. 

Zeus? This is Typhoeus the Titan who calls you! 

Zeus, where are you? • 

—In Memoriam: RZ 


36 


Robert Silverberg 



Between June and July this year 
my father disappeared 
into regions of dementia 


Delicate neural connections 
fused forever 

leaving the hard-wired husk 


Which eats and reads 
and watches TV 

Looking emptily out at the world 


"Hide the knives! 

He acts on impulse now, 
delusions make him anxious" 


I went to say good-bye and found 
a shell to be steered 

through unprogrammable days and nights 
There was no back-up disk 

--Peg Healy 








Long-time Asimov's contributor Mary Rc'senblum joins new¬ 
comer James Sarafin in a nrjesrrierizing look ot what "One 
Good Juror" can meqpto a plaintiff. The story was the result 
of a conversation about justice versus the law, both in the 
present onSTtn the future. Ms. Rosenblum thought the tale 
presented them with "an interesting opportunity to consider 
the evolution of our legal system." Mr. Sarafin has worked 
as a civil trial lawyer in Alaska for the past fifteen years. 
Although the following tale is his first to appear in our pages, 
he currently has two other stories in our inventory. 


Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Illustration by Anthony Bari 





February 1997 

R t first, it looked as if she had lost before she’d even started. The de¬ 
fense attorney finished his argument, took his seat at the opposing 
counsel’s table, looking relaxed and confident. For a moment, the 
courtroom was silent; Erin heard only the blood coursing in her own 
ears as she completed the download of her client’s e-files. 

“Ms. Mendel?” the judge said. Erin rose slowly. She had commenced 
scanning the data, which made it a struggle to vocalize. 

“Your Honor, a moment please. I’m still coming up to speed on the case.” 
She addressed a simulacrum seated behind a raised bench at the end 
of the courtroom. The judge’s image, of an elderly, bespectacled woman, 
was larger than life-size in order to increase her presence and authority 
in the courtroom. But factors like apparent sex and age were largely ir¬ 
relevant for assessing the temperament of an artificial judicial intelli¬ 
gence. Much more important would be a knowledge of the early cases on 
which this judge had learned and evolved its decision-making ability. 
Erin didn’t have time to look up that information. 

‘The court permitted your last-minute substitution as counsel for the 
plaintiff,” the judge was saying, in a severe, schoolmarmish voice and dic¬ 
tion, “but not at the cost of delaying these proceedings. Now, please re¬ 
spond to Mr. Clark’s points and advise the court of any reasons why your 
client’s claims should not be dismissed as a matter of law.” 

Erin had barely heard defense counsel’s argument. All she had known 
when she’d walked into the courtroom ten minutes earlier was that she 
represented the plaintiff in a products liability case. A high-profile one, 
judging from all the media reps and curious citizens she had to squeeze 
past in the doorway and who now filled the spectator seats. 

She cleared her throat. The judge wouldn’t wait any longer. She had to 
say something, right now, or she would be hit with time or monetary 
sanctions. 

‘Your Honor,” she began—the client, what was his name again? “Mr. 
Polk has suffered brain damage as a result of using the product manu¬ 
factured and distributed by the defendant.” She hoped she was getting 
this much right. Yes—there it was in the medical records. “Permanent, 
steadily increasing erosion of long-term memory, loss of personality, as a 
direct and proximate result of—•” 

The judge interrupted. ‘Yes, Ms. Mendel. As I understand it, causation 
isn’t disputed. Is that correct, Mr. Clark?” 

Good—if she’d pegged Clark right, he loved the sound of his own voice 
too much to stop at a simple yes or no. She might pick up another minute 
of two. 

‘Yes, Your Honor.” Clark gathered himself to his feet. “We don’t deny 
that use of our product can cause such injuries, but only in a statistically 
insignificant number of cases. This risk is outweighed by benefits to sev¬ 
eral million other users for whom the product is perfectly safe.” 

40 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 

‘Then the only question is whether the product is defective. You should 
proceed to address that point, Ms. Mendel.” 

What was the product? She accessed her predecessor’s discovery files. 
Design drawings, pages of technical specifications flickered through her 
mind. Come on, the common name is good enough for now.... 

My God. It was the cerebral implant made by NeuroTek, Inc. 

The same implant she wore inside her own head, was using right now. 

Erin had tried enough cases to let none of her shock come to the sur¬ 
face of her face; she recovered quickly, even as she became aware of the 
latest medical studies showing that Polk was far from alone. 

“This injury has been reported in 987 other users of the NeuroTek im¬ 
plant,” she told the judge. “How could it not be defect—•” 

“Objection, Your Honor,” Clark said, rising to his feet. “Evidence of oth¬ 
er product injuries is prejudicial, and not admissible in cases where cau¬ 
sation is undisputed.” 

“Correct,” the judge said. Erin realized why NeuroTek had not disput¬ 
ed that the implant had caused the brain damage. She would have to find 
a different approach. 

“A moment, Your Honor, to confer with my client?” The judge might be 
impatient with the delay, but would not refuse her this. 

The judge removed her spectacles and glared. “Please make it quick, 
Counselor.” 

She leaned over to the man seated at the table beside her. Ephraim 
Polk had a slight, wiry build, good, disciplined posture, and a face that 
could not be called handsome but was striking nonetheless. She had seen 
his unsmiling photo somewhere before, she was sure, in a news clip or 
magazine perhaps, but it had given little hint of the impact he made in 
person, seated at close range. 

“How long did you wear the implant?” she whispered. Erin turned an ear 
toward him and closed her eyes, as if listening. She did want to know the 
answer, but right now it was far less important than the few seconds she 
gained to scan the evidence offered to the court by the client’s former lawyer. 

Polk’s features wrinkled in thought. “I’m . .. not sure.” 

“Keep thinking about it, and say something back to me whether you re¬ 
call or not.” 

During this exchange, Erin accessed the depositions of both sides’ ex¬ 
pert witnesses, including the neurobiologists. She was annoyed to find 
herself glancing sideways at Polk as she did. 

What was the law here? She had never handled a products liability 
suit, on either the plaintiff’s or defense side; she had warned him of that. 
Still, he had begged her to represent him. 

“I just can’t remember, for sure.” Polk’s head was bowed in thought. 
“Must have been around the time I started working professionally in 
news art. Whenever that was.” 


One Good Juror 


41 


February 1997 


She was nodding her head, but her attention had turned away from 
scanning her implant’s internal buffer to connecting to the Net’s law li¬ 
brary. 

“Ms. Mendel, the court is losing patience.” The judge removed her spec¬ 
tacles, shook them for emphasis at the side of her head; as she did so, the 
whole side of her face there twisted up, eyebrow rising, mouth half-gri¬ 
macing into a smile, even an ear wiggling out, as if these features were 
connected by invisible strings to the spectacles. The effect was ludicrous, 
and Erin had to stifle a smile. Must be a glitch in the personality-to-im- 
age interface; or else the interface was simply attempting to manifest 
some quirk in the judge’s core personality. 

Erin straightened, not yet having received a response to her legal 
search. 

“Your Honor, I call the court’s attention to a factual dispute in the ex¬ 
pert testimony. The defense expert does claim the product is reasonably 
safe for its intended use. But the plaintiff’s expert, Dr. Singh, opines that 
the NeuroTek implant is unreasonably dangerous, and that incorpora¬ 
tion of a different wetware interface probably would have avoided the— 
Mr. Polk’s injury.” 

“Yes, but what about the cost issue? As Mr. Clark has pointed out, the 
Product Liability Reform Act, as amended in 2034, was intended to free 
consumers of the unreasonable costs of safety measures that benefit only 
a minority of individuals. The NeuroTek product has received federal ap¬ 
proval, and its safety warnings are adequate as a matter of law. The 
court has reviewed the recordings of Dr. Singh’s testimony—he nowhere 
suggests that NeuroTek could have used a different wetware interface 
without increasing the product’s cost, does he?” 

The results of Erin’s own legal search had come back, and she con¬ 
firmed that the law was indeed as unfavorable as the judge described. 
There had to be something more in Singh’s testimony. .. . 

“Yes, he does, Your Honor, he just uses different terminology. He says 
that alternative, safer interfaces are, quote, ‘readily available,’ and refers 
to several competing products manufactured in China and India that use 
these safer interfaces and are marketed at competitive prices.” 

This had to be the way, she knew in her gut; the judge’s hesitation told 
her that much. A judicial intelligence had to be careful to avoid any deci¬ 
sion that might depend even slightly on fine distinctions or idiosyn¬ 
crasies in human spoken or body language. After all, the appeals court 
justices were human. 

Clark was on his feet again. “Your Honor, if I may... Dr. Singh’s views 
are on the lunatic fringe of brain implant technology.” 

“His views may be in the minority,” Erin said, “but even the defense ex¬ 
pert has conceded that the issue remains unresolved to a scientific cer¬ 
tainty, and that Dr. Singh’s views represent one possible valid approach.” 

42 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 

“That is correct,” the judge said. “The court finds that Dr. Singh’s opin¬ 
ions are based on valid science and are thus admissible evidence.” 

Erin had shut-down her scans and now focused everything on her ar¬ 
gument. “And the question of which of two competing but equally valid 
scientific approaches is more persuasive has to be resolved by a human 
juror, on the basis of the relative credibility of the expert witnesses’ testi¬ 
mony and demeanor.” 

For a long moment, the courtroom was silent again. Erin knew the 
judge was reviewing all reported decisions and authorities related to the 
issue. In this instance, she hoped, the AI would act like a human trial 
judge and adopt the safest course. Finally, the judge ruled. 

‘The defendant’s motion for summary judgment dismissing the plain¬ 
tiff’s claims is denied. The alternative motion for determination of law of 
the case is granted. This matter is hereby scheduled for trial commenc¬ 
ing next Monday at 8:30 A.M. The juror shall be instructed that he or she 
may find that defendant’s product is defective only if the evidence shows 
that it could have been designed or manufactured to prevent this injury 
without a significant increase in the cost of the product.” 

How in the world are we supposed to prove that? Erin wondered. 

“Counsel shall adhere to a three-day trial schedule. The case shall be giv¬ 
en to the juror no later than 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday. Any delays or viola¬ 
tions of the evidence rules shall be met with time or monetary sanctions.” 

“What does this mean?" Polk whispered. 

“It means you’ve won your right to a trial,” she told him. “But we’re in 
big trouble.” 

Ephraim wondered if he had made a mistake in hiring Erin Mendel. 
Her office shocked him, and he let her see it. 

“Come in.” She admitted him stiffly, squeezing up against the holo- 
window so that he could get around the end of her desk to the empty 
chair that was obviously meant for him. 

There was no reason to spend money for the ostentation of expensive 
space if your reputation was made in the courtroom, Ephraim supposed. 
But after Derocher’s spacious office with its real window and woolen car¬ 
peting, this ... closet seemed more symbolic perhaps than it should have. 

“Mr. Polk.” She offered him a long-fingered hand. “I’m sorry that I had 
to literally rush in at the eleventh hour. But you didn’t leave me much 
time when you asked me to represent you.” She tilted her head, her eyes 
steady on his face. They were green, he noticed—the kind of green that 
could look cold as arctic seawater. “Suppose we talk about your case. Now 
that we have actually been awarded a trial.” 

“Why did you say we were in trouble?” He tried to moderate his tone. 
Ms. Mendel was the only lawyer who had been willing to take the case af¬ 
ter Derocher dumped him, after all. 


One Good Juror 


43 


February 1997 

“You’re getting a trial because the AI deferred to the human ability to 
assess credibility and interpret nuances of human language.” She was 
still studying him. “That doesn’t mean you have much hope of winning. 
This kind of product liability case has been unsuccessful in nearly every 
instance in the last decade.” 

‘The judge said something about deciding if the cost of using a safer in¬ 
terface was significant. My God!” He unclenched his fists with an effort. 
“How can any amount of money be significant compared to what. . . 
what’s happening to me?” 

“That is exactly what we need to convey to the juror,” she said crisply. 
“So talk to me, please.” 

“What about? You got all the stuff from Derocher, didn’t you? He said 
he’d upload it.” Ephraim fixed his eyes on her holographic window. It was 
a cheap job—a flat and unreal vista of the Rocky Mountains. The last 
batch of images he had downloaded pressed against the wall in his brain 
like a flood rising behind a dam. Which was imagination, he knew. The 
storage area that had been created to hold the raw data from the Net was 
isolated by a barrier of individually destroyed neurons rather than any 
kind of physical structure. 

It still felt like a dam about to burst. He could open the floodgates. If he 
chose. And if he did—he might end up with no memory of any moment be¬ 
fore this one. Who would he be, with no past? ‘Tm sorry.” Ephraim turned 
his attention back to the lawyer. “I didn’t mean to...” He broke off abruptly. 

She wasn’t listening to him. She was staring into space, her gaze unfo¬ 
cused, her posture alert and engaged. Her eyes moved so rapidly that her 
irises seemed to shiver, and her pupils had contracted to pinpoints. Like 
a sleeper in REM sleep, he thought. Like someone suffering a mild 
seizure. Sudden comprehension evoked the familiar ache in the muscles 
around his eyes. When you opened those floodgates—used your interface 
to its full capacity—the outside world ceased to exist. The brain sorted 
and filed the raw data you had downloaded directly from the Net, label¬ 
ing it with sensory tags rather than words—so that you drowned in 
flashes of color and image, the sound of a tuba, a car starting, the scent of 
pancakes burning, or a whiff of garbage. He had videotaped himself in 
that state once. 

It had frightened him. “You wear one,” he rasped. “Damn it!” 

She blinked, startled, regaining focus quickly. “Excuse me?” 

“You’re wearing an implant. NeuroTek?” He bolted to his feet, rage 
coursing through him. “What are you trying to pull here?” 

“I’m trying to win a judgment for you,” she said coldly. “Yes, I wear a 
NeuroTek implant. A lot of people do.” 

He felt. . . betrayed. There was no other word for it. “It’s a conflict of 
interest.” He glared at her. “How can you prosecute NeuroTek if you’re 
happy with their product?” 


44 


Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 



Address 
City _ 
State 


Zip 


PO Box 5133 
Harlan, IA 51593 
op call toll-free 
1 800 333 4561 



Outside U.S.A.: Add $8 per year tor shipping & handling. (U.S. funds 
only, payment with order). Please allow 8 to 8 weeks for delivery of 
yoor first issoe. We poblish a double issoe In Joly/Aogust, which 
counts as two issues toward your subscription. 


HI737 












February 1997 

Her laugh caught him by surprise. “Mr. Polk, Ephraim, believe me, it 
was quite a shock to discover the nature of your suit. It was . . . disturb¬ 
ing.” She closed her eyes briefly, and let out a breath that was almost but 
not quite a sigh. “You can fire me, if you seriously believe that my prose¬ 
cution of your case will be influenced by my use of a similar implant.” 
She shrugged. “At this point, it may be hard for you to find another good 
lawyer willing to handle this case.” She stressed the “good” slightly, with¬ 
out the least hint of false modesty. 

She was right about that, Ephraim thought moodily. Which didn’t 
make him any happier. Her implant worked. He looked away, the words 
to end their relationship poised on the end of his tongue. 

There was no time to find another lawyer. 

She nodded briskly. “I need to take a look at what you do. I’ve never 
had much time to follow the art world, but you are quite the name.” 

“For the moment,” he said between clenched teeth. 

“If I am to convince a juror that you have lost something of value, I 
need to know what it is that’s valuable. So tell me.” She crossed her arms 
and perched on the corner of her desk. She seemed as much a stranger in 
this small space as he, Ephraim thought. This was not where she really 
worked. 

“I do . . . newsmedia collages.” He frowned, wondering how much she 
would understand—or care. “I start with a theme—an idea that’s both in¬ 
tellectual and emotional. Then I search for images that—put together— 
convey that theme. Our news—what we think is worthy of attention—re¬ 
flects our innermost self as a society.” Images from Children’s Crusade 
swept over him—half finished—and the stored download bulged against 
the invisible walls in his skull. “I sweep the media archives. I might sort 
through a million images to get the handful I need. It’s like ... a chord of 
music. Only I’m dealing with millions of notes, instead of a handful of oc¬ 
taves. I render the final collage as holographic images. I add music, 
scent, heat or cold. And when it’s done, when it works, I am communicat¬ 
ing to the person who stands on that stage beyond mere language. Words 
only skim the surface. This touches the soul....” He broke off abruptly. 
He hadn’t intended this outburst, couldn’t read her expression at all. 
“People buy it.” He shrugged 

‘That’s why you had the implant done? Just so that you could access 
more images?” 

“Just? ” Incredulous, he stared at her. “Just so—yes!” He balled his 
hand into a fist. “It takes the right images to make it work—a lot of the 
right images. If I could, I’d search every archive in the Net. To make it 
work. Did you have a dog when you were a kid?” 

She blinked at him. “Yes.” 

“Did you love it?” 

Her expression was definitely wary now. “Yes, I did. I was very young.” 

46 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


“I found a puppy when I was ten.” He looked back at the fake view of 
the Rockies. “Someone had thrown it into a dumpster. It was tiny—its 
eyes barely open—way too young to be away from its mother. I fed it 
canned milk with an eyedropper, and woke up every hour so that it 
wouldn’t get hungry. I wanted it to live. I had never wanted anything so 
much in my life. Later on, we had to give it away—we couldn’t keep pets 
in our apartment. But that wasn’t so bad. It was alive, and that’s what 
mattered.” He looked her in the face. ‘That week is part of what I put 
onstage. It’s part of what makes it come together the way it does—the 
echo of that kid wanting, those silent hours when everyone else in the 
whole damn world was asleep, and he lay there waiting for the alarm, 
just him and that squirming bit of life. Cut out that memory—take it 
away, and ... it loses something.” Children’s Crusade. He swallowed. “It 
is lessened,” he whispered. “Shallow. Can you understand?” He got 
abruptly to his feet, needing to be out of this tiny office, away from this 
woman who would weigh his loss and maybe find it insufficient when 
weighed against significant cost. He was losing focus. The scene was un¬ 
raveling into frayed and disconnected images. The implant was leaking 
again. If it was a bad episode, he might drool. “I’ll show you what I do.” 
He opened the door. “But not right now.” 

“Wait!” 

Not in front of her.... He fled down the hall. 

Erin stared at the closed door after he left, not reviewing the mass of 
information about his case now stored in her head or doing any of the 
other mental work she had to do before the trial began. The air circula¬ 
tion in her office was poor, and his scent still lingered; it was not un¬ 
pleasant, she decided. 

Was he more miffed about her having the implant or the fact that her 
office was so small and shabby? She looked around at the four little walls 
with the one holo view. No artwork or other decorations. None of the 
stacks of old lawbooks that most lawyers still kept as props to impress 
clients. She hadn’t even bothered to get her degrees framed and hung up. 
This was a place even smaller and emptier than where she lived. 

Too much time and money spent on loser cases. A good trial lawyer 
could make a living, have a nice office, maybe even real human staff— 
but you had to be selective to live off contingency cases. Erin had pushed 
herself hard enough, often enough, to know her weakness: she loved the 
pressure, the all-consuming intensity of trial too much. The tougher the 
case, the more that was true. 

She had some other work—paying, transactional work that would at 
least help her to meet her overhead. But none of that would put her in 
trial on Monday. She would probably lose, and Polk would walk away 
blaming her; but not as much as she would blame herself. Then she 


One Good Juror 


47 


February 1997 

would be despondent for a few weeks, until she managed to latch on to 
the next loser case, and go through it all again. 

Polk seemed different from her other clients, though. He was guarded, 
wary, maybe not just of her; it was probably his nature. But a few times 
there, when he had talked about his work, and especially the puppy, she 
had caught glimpses of a great depth and power of being. An inner 
charisma? Maybe he was someone who could only open himself up to oth¬ 
ers under cover of his art. If so, that made it even more imperative that 
she see and comprehend what he did. 

Erin shook her head. She had too much work to do to waste time in 
reverie, and a lot she needed to do with him. She decided to spend half an 
hour reviewing the medical files, to give him time to get home before call¬ 
ing. There was no unanimity about the how, but the medical authorities 
agreed that the NeuroTek interface was erasing or over-writing estab¬ 
lished connections between the billions of neurons in the brains of some 
users. In that intricate webwork was stored a person’s memories from 
earliest childhood, memories that made up the very sense of self. Some 
users had been damaged to the point where they did not know who they 
were at all, would have to record messages to themselves before going to 
sleep every night. And a frequent secondary symptom, present in 
Ephraim’s case, was occurrence of petit mal-like seizures, triggered by 
stress. 

As she accessed this information, Erin realized that the same thing 
could be happening to her even now, insidiously, without her ever know¬ 
ing until it was too late. But in her case, that might not be so great a 
tragedy. Some people never had a real childhood to lose. She could imag¬ 
ine worse things than forgetting the day one of the older kids had taken 
her street mutt away and killed it... . 

The guarded expression was already in place when his face appeared 
on her phone monitor. She was right, then; it was habitual. 

“Ephraim,” she said, before he could speak, “I’ll make you a deal. You 
won’t run out on me like that again, and I won’t run out on you. Okay?” 

He wasn’t going to agree to anything that simply, she saw. 

“We have to go over your testimony,” she began again. 

“What’s the point? You said I didn’t have a chance.” 

“I didn’t say that. I said it’s going to be tough.” She could not bring her¬ 
self to tell him how tough. The class action had been abolished by statute 
two decades ago. Of the 163 individual NeuroTek lawsuits brought by 
mind-damaged users, seventy-eight had already been dismissed by sum¬ 
mary judgment. This would be the tenth case to go to trial. NeuroTek had 
won the first nine. “We have to work really hard and hope for some luck. 
Everything depends on whether we can get a good juror. 

“All that stuff I said to the judge about the credibility of expert wit¬ 
nesses . . . your expert isn’t enough to win this for you. The thing that 

48 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


counts most is your testimony. We have to make that juror understand 
what this has done to you, make that person feel what you’re going 
through.” 

“I went through all that with Derocher. When I gave the deposition.” 

“That was different—you were answering questions for NeuroTek’s at¬ 
torney. Here, you’ll be talking to the person who’s deciding the case. We 
have only a short, short time to present your testimony.” It used to be 
that products liability cases were allowed weeks, even months of trial 
time, and that time-sanctions were not imposed for just a single improp¬ 
er question. She didn’t tell him that, either. 

“A damn program is going to judge me! What the hell is an AI going to 
care if I remember my first day of second grade? I can look facts up, 
right? I can access news clips. We need a human judge, not a computer.” 

“Blame the public,” Erin told him. “People got tired of paying the in¬ 
creasing costs of the legal system. An AI doesn’t require a staff, office, 
salary, healthcare, or retirement. And it isn’t the judicial intelligence 
that will decide here, Ephraim. It is our juror—our very human juror. 
Which is why we have to figure out what’s really vital to tell and decide 
how you’re going to tell it.” 

He wasn’t even looking directly at her anymore. His face had lapsed 
into a glazed, lost expression that frightened her. At the same time, there 
was something compelling about those gray eyes.. . . 

“Look, we don’t have to talk about your art right now. Let’s go over 
your background. When you started using the implant and when you 
first noticed problems. Then we’ll talk about what kind of juror we should 
try to select. We don’t have to do it in my office. You name the place, and 
I’ll meet you there.” 

He named a coffee shop near his own neighborhood, and she went 
there and waited for two hours, and he never showed up. She went to his 
residence in a high-rent tower, but there was no answer and the door 
would not admit her. She took the elevator to the underground, walked 
two blocks, and caught the mag-lev to the stop nearest her own apart¬ 
ment. 

Erin worked alone all weekend. She finished reading the medical 
records and stored them in what she pictured in her mind as an old-fash¬ 
ioned paper-file drawer. She colored that drawer red, then linked it to the 
remembered smell of antiseptic and the sound of an ambulance siren. 
She did the same with the product designs, marking that drawer blue, 
cross-linked with the smell of motor grease and the steady hum of heavy 
machinery. The defense experts’ depositions and reports were colored 
black and linked to the bang and cordite smell of a gunshot. If she need¬ 
ed to find something fast, in the middle of a rapid cross-examination, she 
could access the files instantly by remembering the color, the smell, or 
the sound. 


One Good Juror 


49 


February 1997 

She prepared her opening statement, then worked on the expert exam¬ 
inations and thought about what kind of juror they wanted: which age, 
sex, occupation, ethnic, and other characteristics might be more receptive 
to Ephraim’s case. One more thing she needed to cover with Ephraim. 
She tried to call, wound up leaving messages. Her last message late Sun¬ 
day night was abrupt. 

“Ephraim, if you don’t at least show up in court tomorrow morning, the 
judge will default you. And NeuroTek will win. Is that what you want?” 

She must have been out of her mind to agree to represent an artist. Es¬ 
pecially in a case like this, she thought, as she broke the connection. It 
was his choice—it wasn’t her fault if he didn’t show. But she didn’t sleep 
well that night, even after she let herself go to bed, and when she walked 
into the courtroom in the morning, she didn’t expect to see him. 

But he was there, sitting at their little table and carefully looking away 
from her. Clark had come with two legal assistants, several cases of pa¬ 
per exhibits and records, and a laptop Netlink. Was he just an old-style 
lawyer—or had all these trials taught him something about his client’s 
product? 

Between the two counsel tables and the judge’s bench was an empty 
space, maybe four by seven meters, flanked on one end by the jury box. 
Erin thought of that space as the arena—which it had once actually been, 
centuries before, in medieval England, when trial had meant trial by 
combat, and justice would be dispensed only through divine intervention. 
It might take some of that to salvage this one, Erin thought grimly. 

She started to explain the juror selection process to Ephraim, but the 
judge appeared, opened the day’s session, and brought in the jury pool, 
seating them in the twelve seats along the right-hand wall. The court¬ 
house had been constructed almost fifty years ago, in the days when 
everyone had the right to a jury of twelve—before public concern about 
costs became the overriding tenet of the judicial system. After the selec¬ 
tion process eliminated all but one from the jury pool, that single juror 
would sit alone among the eleven empty seats. 

The jurors each gave their background information, then the two 
lawyers took turns asking them questions. Erin wanted to know if they 
or anyone close to them had ever been seriously injured. How about an 
injury to the mind? How did they think it would make them feel, if their 
memory was eroding, they were gradually losing their self? And if you 
were aware of it, and knew you were also losing the ability to do the work 
that was the most important thing in your life? 

Clark wanted to know if they had read or watched any news reports of 
implant injuries. Did they know any implant users themselves? Were they 
aware of all the millions of users who had used the NeuroTek implant 
safely, for a number of years? Of how much some people relied on the im¬ 
plant to do their work or function more efficiently in today’s society? 

Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


50 


Asimov's 

“Ms. Mendel, I’ve noticed, is a user herself,” Clark said, as if in after¬ 
thought. “If not NeuroTek, then one of our competitors’ products.” 

Erin raised her head. Oh, no—he wasn’t going to get away with that 
one! It meant little to ask the judge to tell the potential jurors to disre¬ 
gard Clark’s statement. She had to make them understand that it was 
outrageous. 

“Object! What counsel do or don’t do themselves is totally irrelevant.” 
She was on her feet and could feel her voice quivering. It was no pre¬ 
tense; she was angry—she had a well of anger to draw on that had been 
growing deeper all weekend, she realized. “What’s worse, it’s unfairly 
prejudicial to Mr. Polk.” She touched her hand lightly to Ephraim’s 
shoulder; she could feel him begin to flinch away and squeezed her fin¬ 
gers to stop him. “Your Honor, Mr. Clark knows full well that remark 
was improper.” 

“Sustained,” the judge said. “The court finds that defense counsel’s 
statement is a moderate violation of the rules of evidence. Defendant is 
sanctioned with removal of ten minutes’ time from its opening statement.” 

As Erin regained her seat, she noticed that Ephraim was looking at her 
for the first time that morning. 

One potential juror, an older woman, announced that anyone who 
would put something artificial in his head was assuming the risk of los¬ 
ing his mind. Erin convinced the judge there was legal cause for dis¬ 
missal of this juror. Another juror had a brother who had been mind- 
damaged by an implant; a second admitted she could never be fair to a 
big corporation. Clark got them both dismissed, for cause. After that, 
three more potential jurors, who obviously did not want to sit through a 
three-day trial, claimed they could not be fair to a corporation either. The 
pool was thinning out rapidly. 

It came time for Erin to exercise her first peremptory challenge. By 
tradition and court rule, each party had three such opportunities to dis¬ 
miss a juror without legal cause, for any reason. It was each side’s chance 
to narrow the pool down to the one juror who might be most favorable 
and receptive to that side. 

There was no more important issue than the person who would decide 
the case. She didn’t have the right to make the choice on her own; this 
was Ephraim’s trial. She conferred with him, recommending challenge of 
a middle-aged male who had only given them a single, contemptuous 
glance during the entire proceeding. Ephraim agreed. 

It was Clark’s turn, and he bumped a young male college student. Erin 
and Ephraim agreed to dismiss the elderly man who had not seemed able 
to understand Erin’s questions, and Clark challenged a young female 
hospital nurse. 

Erin had one remaining challenge. There were two people left in the 
jury box, a man who was a senior partner in a large structural engineer- 


One Good Juror 


51 


February 1997 

ing firm and a young woman who worked in a body ornamentation shop. 
The man’s answers to both lawyers’ questions had been deliberate, 
thoughtful. The woman had answered more spontaneously; she definite¬ 
ly seemed more malleable and subject to emotional appeal. 

“We should dismiss him.” Erin started to rise. 

“No,” Ephraim whispered back. “I want to dismiss her." 

She stared at him, shook her head a minute distance. “You don’t want 
him, believe me.” 

“Ms. Mendel?” the judge said. 

“Yes,” Ephraim said, “we do.” 

“I don’t have time now to tell you what occupational categories, body 
language, and personality types can mean to your case. It’s enough that 
he’s an engineer—all he probably knows is how to think logically. And 
he’s going to know it’s hard to make anything safer without spending 
money.” Ephraim was nodding his head as if he agreed. 

“I think he’ll make a good juror,” he said as she started to rise. Then he 
looked directly at her, with those eyes that still showed no tint of blue to 
wash out the gray, even under the direct overhead lights. “Whose deci¬ 
sion is this?” 

She couldn’t believe it. Consulting the client was usually just a formal¬ 
ity; none had ever overridden her recommendation on a point of trial 
strategy like this. 

“Ms. Mendel.” The judge’s voice had shifted to the severe edge, and 
Erin saw her hand move toward the spectacles. The situation was al¬ 
ready absurd; if Erin had to watch those waving spectacles contort that 
face again, she might not be able to stop from laughing. 

Erin swallowed, stood upright, and dismissed the young woman. 
Please, please, bump that man, she prayed, as the judge looked at Clark. 
If Clark did so, the judge would have to bring in more jurors. No one 
could be as bad as this guy. 

“NeuroTek waives its last challenge, Your Honor. We’re satisfied that 
Mr. Calendri is quite qualified to serve as the juror on this case.” 

I’ll bet, Erin thought. 

“Very well, we have a jyror,” the judge said. “It is now 11:37 A.M. We 
will adjourn for lunch, reconvene here at 1:00 P.M. Counsel will then give 
opening statements, and we will receive the testimony of plaintiff’s ex¬ 
pert, Dr. Singh.” 

At lunch in an underground cafeteria, Ephraim wanted to talk but 
Erin cut him off. 

“I have to work on my opening and questions for that neurobiologist 
your last lawyer hired,” she told him. “Believe me, we will talk at the end 
of the day.” 

“Why do you say it like that? ‘Neurobiologist your last lawyer hired’? 
Derocher said Dr. Singh is a leading expert in his field.” 

52 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 



Get Twice the 

Science Fiction Entertainment! 


Subscribe to both Asimov's Science Fiction 
and Analog Science Fiction and Fact and 
save more than 25% off tbe regular price! 
You'll get a total of 24 issues (12 issues of 
each) for only $49.97. You save $18.00! 

Each issue of Asimov's Science Fiction will 
take you on a journey into intergaloctic 
adventures. Analog Science Fiction and 
Fact blends scientific realism with fantasy in 
each spellbinding issue. Both magazines 
feature some of the most creative Science 
Fiction writers of our time. 

To subscribe, fill out the order form below, 
or call us to place your credit card order 
today! 


To charge your order by phone call, toll -free 
Outside the USA: 515-247-7571 


Mail to: 


ASIMOV'S* P.O. Box 5130* Harlon, IA 51593 


LI My payment of $49.97 is enclosed for a one year 
subscription to both Asimov's Science Fiction and 
Analog Science Fiction and Fact. I save $18.00! 
□ Bill me 


Address_ 

City_State_Zip_ 

Please allow 6 to 8 weeks for delivery of the first issue. We publish a double issue of each maga¬ 
zine, which counts as two issues toward your subscription. Outside USA: Add $8 per year for 
shipping and handling (U.S. funds only, payable with order). HI745 










February 1997 


“Maybe he is. But one, he’s Indian, so he speaks English as a foreign 
language. Two, he’s never, ever testified in court, and three, I tried to 
work with him yesterday and he’s hopeless. I don’t think he gave a 
straight answer to a single question. He’s only any good to me—to us—if 
he can communicate his expertise to the juror.” 

She turned from her work and looked fully at him. “You have to under¬ 
stand something, Ephraim. Derocher only hired Singh to get an opinion 
that might convince NeuroTek to settle. When NeuroTek didn’t blink, 
Derocher bailed out. A lawyer doesn’t make money on a contingency case 
unless he wins or gets a settlement. Do you understand exactly what I’m 
telling you?” 

They were silent, and she was immersing in her work again when he 
said, “He said I should take their offer.” 

“What?” Part of her attention came back to the table. 

“Derocher. NeuroTek did offer to settle, but it wasn’t much. And they 
wouldn’t admit anything or agree to recall their product. I said no.” 

“You turned down a settlement offer on this case?” 

He nodded, with no trace of apology. “I’m pretty well broke, trying to 
pay all my medical bills, but I really don’t care about the money. De¬ 
rocher once said that if NeuroTek ever loses just one of these cases, they 
would face unlimited liability because everyone else could use the defec¬ 
tive product finding against them. So they’d have to settle with the other 
injured people and recall the implant to fix the interface. Is that true?” 

“Yes, it probably is,” she told him. “But let me get this straight. You won’t 
settle for anything less than total victory—and you do just about every¬ 
thing possible to ensure that your lawyer can’t win? That’s wonderful.” 

He started to speak, but she raised her hand and turned back to her 
work. Artists, she thought. Never again. 

At 1:02 P.M., Erin started her opening statement of the case from the 
counsel’s podium, and she did not proceed far before she realized how in¬ 
adequate it would be. This was her first and best opportunity to tell the 
juror Ephraim’s story and she could not even begin it because she barely 
knew it herself. Oh, she could talk about the memory loss and the med¬ 
ical cause and the grim prognosis. But she couldn’t talk about Ephraim 
or what the loss of himself really meant. Dr. Singh arrived and took his 
seat in the middle of her statement, and she was grateful for the inter¬ 
ruption. She could tell the juror was too. 

When his turn came, Clark talked about the law, the undisputed facts, 
then the law again. He reminded the juror that it would be his duty to fol¬ 
low the law, as the judge instructed. 

Dr. Singh was a small, dark-complexioned man, whose eyes kept darting 
to the media representatives in the spectators’ seats, as if they were a firing 
squad. He did speak English, of a sort. The court translation program only 
had to explain his testimony a few times, in an androgynous monotone. 

Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


54 


Asimov's 


She tried to relax him by first covering his personal background, easy 
questions to start him talking; but he misstated both his marital status 
and the number of his children, correcting himself each time with pro¬ 
fuse, stumbling apologies. She managed to pry out enough of his creden¬ 
tials to qualify him as an expert, but she had worse luck when she tried 
to elicit his key opinions. Again and again, she began over, rephrasing 
her questions; he would assume an air of authority and commence a lec¬ 
ture on some other point. 

“Doctor,” she finally tried, in desperation, “don’t you believe that the 
wetware interface could have been designed to absolutely prevent any 
memory damage, without significantly increasing the product’s cost?” 
She was sure this leading question would earn her a sanction from the 
court, once Clark objected. But he remained seated, clearly enjoying the 
spectacle the way it was unfolding. 

Singh peered at her. She hadn’t once managed to get him to look at the 
juror. “Of course, wetware interface can be designed in several ways, and, 
most unfortunately, I do not know how they all cost.” 

They were going in circles. She would never get him to express clearly 
the opinion that was needed to keep the judge from directing a verdict 
dismissing their case. The juror was watching with an amused expres¬ 
sion, and the judge wouldn’t allow this to go on any longer. She sat 
down. 

Then Clark stood up for his cross-examination and—amazingly—saved 
them, from a directed verdict at least. He brought out a few minor points, 
showing that Dr. Singh was not board-certified in neurobiology in the 
U.S., how his views were in the minority of his field—and then asked the 
question he should never have asked. 

“Just so it’s clear to the juror, Dr. Singh, you’re not actually saying that 
NeuroTek could have improved the safety of its implant at no additional 
significant cost, are you?” 

Dr. Singh peered intently at Clark for a long moment. Erin felt her 
heart begin to seize up. Dr. Singh cleared his throat. 

“No, that is not true.” 

Clark knew better than to continue, but he couldn’t help himself. 
“You’re saying NeuroTek could have made its product safer? Without a 
significant cost increase?” 

“Yes. Of course, that depends on what means ‘significant.’ But—” 

‘Thank you, Doctor.” Clark sat down before he did any more damage to 
his own case. 

For a moment, Erin thought her sigh could be heard throughout the 
courtroom. She glanced quickly at the juror; he still wore an amused ex¬ 
pression. He probably hadn’t even listened to the most critical testimony 
for their case. 

The judge ended the day, and after they left the courtroom and had 

One Good Juror 55 


February 1997 

passed through the gauntlet of media people, Ephraim asked, “How did it 
go today?” 

She looked at him without breaking stride. He was rubbing his shoul¬ 
der, where she had squeezed him. He wasn’t stupid—he didn’t have to 
ask. Only Clark’s mistake had saved them from an outright dismissal. 
They had come in unprepared and wound up with the worst possible ju¬ 
ror anyone could have imagined—a defense lawyer’s dream. 

And it was his fault. 

She took his shoulder very deliberately, closing her hand—gently—on 
exactly the spot where she had gripped him before. “We are going to go to 
your studio,” she said. “Right now. You are going to show me what you do 
with your implant, and what NeuroTek has cost you. Or there is very lit¬ 
tle point in continuing.” He stiffened briefly, jaw tight, giving her a single 
brief glance from the corners of his eyes. Then he shrugged, his taut 
shoulders slumping. 

“Give me an hour, okay?” A tiny muscle leaped along the side of his 
jaw. “I... I need some privacy, first.” 

She stopped, facing him in the middle of the crowded sidewalk, strug¬ 
gling with her anger. “Are you going to let me in this time?” 

“Yes.” Those clear gray eyes met hers without evasion. “This time I’ll 
let you in.” He turned on his heel and strode off down the street before 
she could stop him, never once looking back. 

So he had been there, yesterday. Erin clenched her teeth. And now he 
was running away again. From what? Erin shook her head, wondering 
just how big a disaster this was going to be. 

Slumped on one of his big floor cushions against the wall, Ephraim 
watched on the wall-mounted security screen as Erin rang his bell. Right 
on time. He glanced at his watch. One hour exactly. Anger stirred in his 
belly. This woman was pushy, demanding, invasive —utterly unlike De- 
rocher. He was tempted to let her ring. 

She wanted to win. Derocher had wanted the money. That’s why he 
had dumped the case—he wasn’t going to get paid. Ephraim wondered 
suddenly why winning mattered to her. He closed his eyes, his head 
bursting with the images he hadn’t dared to download, tempted to say 
the hell with it, open the interface, and finish Crusade. If he did, and the 
imperfect interface failed entirely, he would have no memory anymore. 
Crusade would no longer matter. 

Suicide, he thought. Suicide of the soul, or merely of the self? 

The door chime sounded again, and he pushed himself abruptly to his 
feet. His chin was wet. He wiped his face on his sleeve in disgust. “Enter,” 
he said, and watched her vanish from the camera eye as she marched 
into the building’s entry. He met her at the door, noticed that she was 
still furious, although she was hiding it well. 


56 


Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Why pay for cellular phone service if 
you only want it for emergency use? 


The SOS Phone offers a 24-hour call center to connect you 
with your emergency roadside service, 911 service or 
family members in the event of an emergency. 


Last month, I inquired 
ibout cellular phone 
ts surprised 
I to find out how expen- 


n for 



the most basic calling 
plans! I just couldn't 
justify spending that 
much for something I 
only wanted for an 
emergency. Then a 
friend told me about 
a product that would 
solve my problem. f 
It's the SOS Phone— 
a cellular phone 
service designed 

emergency use! 

What does It 


do? With the touch of a button, the 
SOS Phone connects me to the 
roadside emergency service of my 
choice, a 911 service or a trained 
SOS operator, 24 hours a day. If 
I need help, I know it's just a 
phone call away. 

Emergency assistance. 


Ill 


vice. Each SOS Phone 
| has a serial number that 
f is recorded at the Call 
Center. Each time I use 
my phone, the operators 
will know it's me calling, 
and will greet me by name. 
My SOS Emergency 
Record will appear on the 
computer screen with my 
list of 10 most-used num- 
/~\ i'll bers and the operator will 

—' ^ connec * me with the person 

— $£•. or emergency service I need, 

jgf Even if I just want to call 

home to tell my husband that 
^ t j I'm running late, with the 
J - • JBk "call" button, I can! 

TVy it yourself. Why not try it 
rj ~~y ffl| f yourself? If you don't enjoy its 
•—i i convenience and security, return 
JHI it within 90 days for a "No 
Questions Asked" refund. It also 
comes with a three-year manufac- 


rited r 




g >■.... 


eg**? 


Up' replacement warranty. 

' SOS Phone . $99 S12S&H 




By pressing the "tow' 
button. I'll be instantly 
connected to my emer¬ 
gency roadside service 
provider. Or, if I don't 
have one, the SOS operator can 
recommend one and dispatch them immediately. 

The "911" button connects me to the 911 emer¬ 
gency service in my area—best of all, the call is 
absolutely free! 


For fastest service call toll- 

800 - 238-5322 


comtradndustr’ies 







February 1997 


“Thank you for letting me in,” she said with some irony. 

“I don’t normally invite people into my studio.” He leaned against the 
wall, watching her examine his small living space. 

“This is a very expensive apartment complex,” she remarked mildly. 
Her gaze took in the two floor cushions on the oriental rug and the low 
birchwood table, the efficient kitchen wall with its built-in microwave 
and beverage units. It wasn’t much bigger than her office. “Real wood.” 
She bent to stroke the satiny grain of the table top. “Very nice. The carpet 
is handwoven, isn’t it?” She nodded appreciatively. “Other than that, this 
is a rather unpretentious room for this type of building.” 

“I like real textures.” He wondered what she was getting at. “And I 
didn’t choose the building for its prestige.” He heard the defensive note 
in his voice and tried to stifle it. “It has state-of-the-art holographic and 
virtual capabilities built into it. I didn’t have to retrofit my studio.” He 
walked across the small room and palmed the studio door lock. “Would 
you ... like some tea or something?” He wanted to delay this. 

“No, thank you.” She walked through the door, her eyes sweeping the 
barren studio. The holo-stage took up most of the floor. Circular, it rose a 
bare fifteen centimeters from the polished tiles, off-white, its surface as 
pristine as a new snowbank. The directional speakers and scent genera¬ 
tors were hidden in its base. She glanced at it, then walked around it to 
the small shelf on the far wall to stare at the single yellow rose in its cut- 
glass vase. “You like flowers?” 

He lifted the rose by its stem, a thorn pricking his thumb. “We have yet 
to create something this complex and fine from scratch.” The thorn had 
drawn a tiny crimson bead of blood. He wiped it on his shirt and touched 
the delicate, creamy curve of a petal. “This keeps me humble.” He re¬ 
placed the rose in its vase and turned his back on her. “System, on,” he 
said, and the room darkened. Light swirled and shifted above the stage, 
and he felt an illogical twinge of fear. “System, run Fields. Step up onto 
the stage,” he said as the shimmering holographic mist took on color and 
shape. ‘The system is focused on a participant. You don’t get the effect 
from outside.” And he climbed onto the stage without waiting to see if she 
would follow suit. He had meant to explain it to her—what he had at¬ 
tempted to convey here, how he had sorted through images of old battle¬ 
fields and new ones, trying to find the echoes of violence past and pre¬ 
sent, and its segue from life to death to life—to capture the dark frivolity 
of human conflict against the vast landscape of racial memory. 

But the words dried up inside him as the images formed—green fields 
where long spring grass didn’t quite hide the uniform crosses of military 
graves, overlaid with a young Asian man tossing a laughing child into the 
air, and a blonde girl giggling and wrestling with her lover, overlaid with 
a pool of drying blood beside a blooming dandelion. A sparrow pecked for 
crumbs among empty shell casings and crumpled candy wrappers. Build- 

58 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


ings fell in static glimpses. Overlaid one on top of the other within the 
holographic field, the images sharpened and faded at seeming random to 
create a collage that drew the eye and mind from the past to the present 
and back into the past in startling leaps. Bleached stones tumbled amid 
ancient burial mounds and Ephraim smelled frost and wet wool. Trucks 
and tanks rolled, scented with gasoline and a whiff of peppermint, scored 
by percussion and bass oboes. Children played hide-and-seek beneath a 
summer sky marked with the white calligraphy of fighter jets and scent¬ 
ed with new-mown grass. 

Life, death, and laughter, the images came faster and faster—almost 
too fast for the surface mind to register, speaking to a deeper place in the 
human consciousness. The whine of shells falling became bird song. 
Someone cried in pain, overlaid with the soft flute notes of a lullaby. 
Then the sensory whirlwind stilled suddenly and a child emerged from a 
shimmering waterfall, her eyes grave in her thin face. She melted into a 
West African soldier who flashed a white grin even as his flesh faded 
from his bones and his bones crumbled, polished into pearls by the flow¬ 
ing water. The dark-eyed girl shook water from her hair, scooped up the 
gems, and laughed, and her teeth gleamed with the iridescence of the 
pearls. Finally the images faded, leaving only the lingering scent of rain- 
wet pine needles and twilight. 

The room lights came on. 

Erin was standing very still in the center of the stage, her eyes fixed on 
the child’s vanished image, her face utterly unreadable. For the space of 
a dozen heartbeats, she remained silent, then she turned slowly to face 
him. Her eyes were the color of the sea at sunset, shot through with hints 
of gold. 

Ephraim found that he wanted to ask her what she had seen—if it was 
... significant. He didn’t. And he realized that he was afraid to. 

“Thank you.” She looked away briefly, her profile stark against the 
bone-white of the blank walls. When she turned back to him, her manner 
was brisk and professional. “I’d like to see what you were working on 
when the implant began to leak.” 

“No!” The involuntary syllable burst from him. “I. .. it’s not finished. 
I’d rather not.” 

“Ephraim.” She touched his arm, and this time her touch was truly 
gentle. “I need to see it.” 

He looked down at her long fingers and swallowed, wanting desperate¬ 
ly to say no. But winning this trial mattered to her—perhaps in the way 
Crusade mattered to him. “System,” he whispered. “Run Children’s Cru¬ 
sade." 

He fled the stage and the studio. If he stayed, he would do it—down¬ 
load the stored images in his head—the ones that might make Crusade 
whole. 


One Good Juror 


59 


February 1997 

Or destroy him. 

After a long time, Erin came into the main room to stand over him 
where he huddled on a floor cushion. “I’ll see you tomorrow,” she said 
briskly. “I will be examining you on the stand. Just relax and answer my 
questions. And we need to show your art to Calendri. The courtroom has 
holo capability for receiving demonstrative evidence—though nothing as 
good as the stage you have here.” If his work had meant anything to her, 
she was hiding it. 

“Not Crusade,” Ephraim whispered. 

“Please be on time,” was all she said. She left, closing the door gently 
behind her. 

He had wanted her to say that she understood. He realized suddenly 
that he had wanted it a lot. Getting stiffly to his feet, he took down the 
bottle of very old Scotch from the cupboard above the microwave, and 
poured himself a generous shot. The whiskey burned its way into his 
stomach and he stared into the amber depths of the bottle, tempted to 
just keep on filling up the glass until it all went away. 

Tomorrow would still come. He put the bottle back on its shelf and 
went to stand in front of his studio door. He didn’t go in. The temptation 
would be too great. 

On the mag-lev returning from Ephraim’s apartment, Erin could not 
keep her hands still. They fluttered and hopped about her lap like a spar¬ 
row feeding on a battlefield. Or a rooster beating its wings as its throat 
was cut. 

This guy was no fad—Ephraim Polk was for real. What kind of mind 
could sort through the cacophony of media sights, sounds, and smells 
that humanity deluged upon itself daily, and find a theme, an elegant or¬ 
der that was invisible to her and almost everyone else? That could distill 
out of that mass of mostly trite and vacuous raw material an art that was 
as true and powerful as anything she had ever seen, that had moved her 
like nothing else had for a long time? 

If a lawyer could only find a way to move a juror like that.... That was 
what Ephraim needed, what he deserved. And what he didn’t have. 

She saw her station approaching and got up. The car slid smoothly and 
silently to a stop, and she walked the length of the platform to an inter¬ 
section with an underground walkway, turning left to go to her office, in¬ 
stead of going home for the night. If Ephraim didn’t have a lawyer who 
could move people as his own art did, at least the lawyer he had would 
work all night for him, to keep from losing his case. 

But by the time she reached her office building, she wasn’t thinking 
anymore about his art, or her own work, but of the sight of his steady 
gray eyes, the shy hesitancy in his voice, and the smell of his hair as she’d 
stood close to him while he talked about a yellow rose in his hand. 

60 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


Ephraim shifted on the hard wooden chair of the witness stand, watch¬ 
ing Erin pace the empty space of floor that was really a stage, set for dra¬ 
ma and tragedy. The juror watched, too, alone among empty chairs. In¬ 
stead of diminishing him, the empty seats made him appear larger. Or 
maybe it was only his inner knowledge of how important this man was 
that made him seem large, Ephraim thought distractedly. Erin looked 
larger here, too—towering over him, although in reality she wasn’t that 
much taller than he. Power, he thought. He had never addressed the 
many ways that men and women assumed power, both great and petty. 
And was the small power of a domineering lover any less important than 
the power of, say, a major player in the world market? It would have 
made a good subject, he thought bleakly. 

“Will the plaintiff please answer the question?” The judge’s voice man¬ 
aged to sound quite humanly severe. Ephraim started. 

“I’m sorry.” He had disconnected again. At least he wasn’t drooling. 
Erin had to be furious behind her mask of patient tolerance. “I didn’t 
mean to . . . will you repeat the question, please?” 

“Mr. Polk?” Erin stepped to the railing, her nearness forcing him to 
look up at her. “You have described your art as a collage—a compilation 
of images gleaned from decades of media videos and even still pho¬ 
tographs. Why did you purchase NeuroTek’s implant?” She turned her 
gaze on their juror, although her words were still addressed to Ephraim. 
“Couldn’t you access those images just as well through the Net?” 

“I could, but I couldn’t access as many,” he said urgently. “I’m trying to 
create a glimpse of. . . our soul.” Inadvertently, his eyes traveled to the 
nearest holo projection lens recessed in the ceiling overhead. “I’m search¬ 
ing for who we are as a race. I run through thousands of images and 
maybe one of them—a child’s face in a certain light, a flower growing up 
through a crack in an asphalt parking lot—one of them gives me the note 
that I need. And I need a thousand of those moments—those notes—to 
create something that speaks to participants. Don’t you see?” He leaned 
forward, willing her to hear him. “Each of us is so different, and I need to 
speak to everyone. The pieces wouldn’t be as good. They wouldn’t say ... 
what they do.” 

“So you risked the implant because without it, your art would have 
been less than it is,” she mused, turning again to the juror. 

“Objection, leading,” Clark said. 

“Sustained,” the judge said. “A minor violation. Ms. Mendel is docked 
five minutes from final argument.” 

“Why did you risk the implant, Mr. Polk?” Erin asked. 

“It was ... supposed to be safe.” He had almost forgotten the juror. Cal- 
endri sat sternly upright on his uncomfortable chair, frowning as he lis¬ 
tened. Erin hadn’t wanted him. Ephraim couldn’t remember anymore 


One Good Juror 


61 


February 1997 

what had made him demand this man. That moment had fallen into the 
darkness that was eating him. 

“How did you first realize that you were losing memory?” 

“How? I . . . couldn’t remember things.” He blinked at her. “One day I 
was thinking about the . . . the apartment where I grew up. And I real¬ 
ized that I couldn’t remember the name of the street. Or which city we 
lived in. It scared me.” He drew a deep breath, reliving that terrible sense 
of absence and the panic that had seized him. “I spent all afternoon 
searching old records, but I don’t... I mean, my mother died years ago, 
and I didn’t have anything that told me what street we lived on, or what 
it was like. I remember the apartment. It was tiny. I remember her com¬ 
ing home late from her shift, but outside—the street, the buildings—it’s 
a blank.” He stopped for breath. Erin’s eyes had unfocused for an instant, 
as if she were accessing her implant. 

“What about your father?” She nodded encouragingly. “Did he ever 
take you outside?” 

“I don’t have ...” He felt the blood draining from his face. ‘That’s not 
true. I do have a father. I think I got mail from him when I had my first 
show ... I think.” He swallowed. “Is he ... is he still alive?” 

“Yes, Mr. Polk.” Erin’s eyes glazed again for an instant. “He lives in the 
Palm Springs Oasis. I’ll be glad to give you his address after we’re fin¬ 
ished here.” 

“Thank you.” Eprhraim stared at the old dark wood of the railing in 
front of him. “I wonder how he felt about that show? I can’t remember 
that, either.” 

“Ephraim.” It was the first time in her questioning that Erin had used 
his given name. She leaned against the railing, looking down at him, and 
her voice was coaxing. “Tell us about your work in progress. You call it 
Children’s Crusade, don’t you?” 

“Yes.” The word came out a whisper. 

“Will the plaintiff please speak so that we can hear him?” the judge de¬ 
manded. 

“Yes,” Ephraim said more loudly. 

“What would happen to it when it was finished?” 

“The Unwin Gallery in the New York Dome had contracted to show it.” 
He relaxed a little. ‘They showed my last three works.” 

“Were they successful?” 

“Yes.” He wasn’t sure where this was going. It wasn’t a matter of mon¬ 
ey, he wanted to tell her, and sensed that their juror was getting restless. 
“I get a royalty every time someone participates in the piece. And they 
sell virtual copies. Although you don’t get the same effect.” 

“So Children’s Crusade would have made you a lot of money?” 

“Probably.” He shrugged. 

“You speak as if you can’t finish this piece.” 

62 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


“I can’t.” He forced himself to speak up. 

He thought she would ask him why—and he couldn’t tell her. But she 
didn’t ask; instead, she nodded, then looked up at the judge. “Your Hon¬ 
or, I would like to have the juror experience Fields —a piece that Mr. Polk 
finished prior to the malfunction of his implant. And then have him see 
the unfinished piece, Children’s Crusade —if we may?” 

“Yes,” the judge said, “you may proceed.” 

“Run Fields," Erin instructed the system. 

The holographic projection was focused on the jury box, but from his 
adjacent witness chair the images looked only a little distorted, the 
sounds and scents barely out of sync. Calendri sat very still, his eyes 
flicking from here to there to follow the kaleidoscopic images. The piece 
ended. Almost imperceptibly, Calendri seemed to shrug. 

“Now this is the piece that Mr. Polk is unable to finish,” Erin went on 
doggedly. She had noticed that shrug, too, Eprhaim thought bleakly. 
“You can compare them directly. System, run Crusade." 

There was nowhere to run, nowhere to hide. Ephraim watched, unable 
to stop himself. The images pierced him—children playing tag amidst the 
thornbrush huts of dying Africa, a girl with tawny skin and a round 
Asian face beneath a white headscarf carefully cutting the throat of a red 
and black rooster while its scarlet blood ran down her arm, a boy cradling 
a newborn kitten, two children peering through the glassless window of a 
ruined urban building, a young child fleeing through an open-air market 
with his arms full of stolen clothes. . . . The glimpses showered down 
around him like stinging rain, jagged and without power or cohesion. 
Flute and percussion notes whispered in his ears and a breath of icy air 
raised goosebumps on his skin. It didn’t work with the rooster’s bright 
feathers, and the thick, crimson blood. 

“Thus we create ourselves eternally, in an innocence that evolves into 
good or evil, but is never lost,” Ephraim whispered. Those were the notes 
in his working file. He reached for that description, felt for the soul of this 
piece. It was gone. Forever. In his brain, the stored images pressed 
against the walls of his skull, and the access code was there, so easy to in¬ 
voke. Grief pierced him. Release them, he thought. Let the darkness eat 
it all, eat all that was left of him—water of Lethe. At least he would no 
longer care. He began to shape the code images. 

“System, endit.” Erin’s words were close and loud in his ears. 
“Ephraim, don’t" 

The anguish in her voice reached him. Ephraim let the code fade, and 
buried his face in his hands. The pressure of those images threatened to 
burst the walls of his skull, scatter shards of bone like shrapnel, and 
maybe it would be the best thing. “It isn’t finished.” He pressed darkness 
into his eyes with the heels of his hands, wanting to blank those incom¬ 
plete images forever. “I knew how it was supposed to work. I knew what I 


One Good Juror 


63 


February 1997 


wanted. I knew how to finish it." He drew a sobbing breath. “And now ... 
it’s gone. I don’t know . . . what I meant to do here anymore.” He raised 
his head slowly and met Calendri’s impassive stare. “I just don’t know.” 

“What don’t you know, Ephraim?” Erin’s quiet words prodded him 
mercilessly. 

“Playing on the street, going to school.” The words tore their way free. 
“It’s gone. Wiped out. My father, and how he talked to me, how he felt 
when I passed an exam, or when I got hurt. Don’t you understand?” He 
clutched the railing, his nails biting the wood. “Did I tell you about a pup¬ 
py I had? I think I did, but I don’t remember what I told you. You can re¬ 
mind me, but can you make it part of me again?” He closed his eyes 
briefly, his hands shaking. “How can I finish a piece about the child that 
we were and are? I never was a child," He bowed over the smooth wood. “I 
am not even sure that I am human anymore,” he whispered. 

Silence filled the courtroom. And for nearly a minute, no one said any¬ 
thing. 

“That’s all I have, Mr. Polk,” Erin said, and there was a roughness in 
her voice that he hadn’t heard before. She turned to the judge. “Is it about 
time for lunch, Your Honor?” 

“Yes,” the judge said. “At 1:00 P.M. we will reconvene for Mr. Polk’s 
cross-examination.” 

Slowly, Ephraim straightened, and his eyes met those of the juror. A 
brief emotion moved across the man’s face, but it vanished too quickly for 
Ephraim to identify it. Pity, he thought bleakly. Pity for a loser. Then 
Erin’s hand was on his arm and she was guiding him back to his seat. 

“Just a few more questions, Mr. Polk.” Clark studied his paper notes at 
the podium. Erin thought he would not keep Ephraim on the stand much 
longer. This was a case where every “I don’t remember” answer only 
served to illustrate the loss. 

“You wouldn’t have been able to make your art without the implant. 
Isn’t that true?” 

“What?” Ephraim looked so exhausted and vulnerable. Erin had to re¬ 
strain herself from leaping to her feet, rushing forward to interpose her¬ 
self between Ephraim and his attacker. But any objection to questions 
that were entirely proper on cross-examination would only earn her a 
sanction from the judge. 

Clark repeated his question, and Ephraim replied, “No. I still could 
have done it. When I still had my memories.” 

“But you couldn’t have done it as efficiently? It would have taken a lot 
longer, right?” 

“That’s true.” 

“And your work might not have been as good?” 

“Yes.” 


64 


Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


“Now, you did receive a copy of NeuroTek’s disclosure statement and 
product warnings before you had the device implanted, didn’t you?” 

Ephraim’s face showed that lost, perplexed expression that had become 
to him almost as habitual as his guarded one. Once again, Erin found 
herself poised on the edge of her seat. 

“Let me help,” Clark went on quickly, displaying a document on the ex¬ 
hibit monitor. It was two pages long and had a lot of words. “I won’t 
waste the court’s time by reading this now. Mr. Calendri, I’m sure, is 
quite capable of reading it for himself. And the judge will instruct the ju¬ 
ror that these warnings are legally sufficient under federal regulations. 
But to sum it up, this does reveal the risk of memory damage to certain 
users, doesn’t it?” 

“I guess ... if that’s what it says.” 

“And there, at the bottom of the second page, that’s your signature, 
isn’t it?” 

“Yes, it is.” 

“Indicating that you had received this copy of the warnings, had read 
them, and understood them?” 

“Yes.” 

‘Thank you. I have nothing more.” Ephraim’s face showed relief as he 
came down from the stand. Funny, Erin didn’t have any trouble reading 
his expressions anymore. 

“Is that it for me?” he whispered, as soon as he sat at their table. 

‘Yeah,” she told him. “Now it’s NeuroTek’s turn.” 

Clark proceeded to call a progression of expert witnesses—a neurobiol¬ 
ogist, a product safety warnings expert, an implant design expert, and a 
production cost analyst. By now they, along with Clark and his legal as¬ 
sistants, were a smoothly running litigation team. They had all been 
through this many times before, and each expert made his or her points 
quickly and clearly. 

On cross, Erin brought out how much they were being paid by Neu- 
roTek, how many times they had worked for that company before, how 
even the foundations or institutions that employed them were partly 
funded by NeuroTek. As she inquired, she scanned thousands of lines of 
their prior deposition and trial testimony, looking for any inconsistency 
she might use to undermine their credibility. But there were no major 
discrepancies, and explanations for the minor inconsistencies had all 
been ironed out in the previous NeuroTek trials. 

“NeuroTek’s commercials don’t make any mention of the risk of memo¬ 
ry loss, do they?” she asked the safety warnings expert. She displayed a 
series of holo images from the implant’s advertising: a stockbroker call¬ 
ing up quotations by the second, students cramming for exams, a couple 
blissfully engaging in sex from hotel rooms in different cities, with none 
of the encumbering hardware. 


One Good Juror 


65 


February 1997 


“No,” the witness conceded. 

“And these fine-print warnings didn’t do much for a thousand other 
NeuroTek users who have been mind-damaged by the implant, did 
they?” 

For the space of a heartbeat, the expert looked at her. Then he raised 
his eyebrows. Erin had gone too far; and in that strange, involuntary 
communion that sometimes forms between lawyer and hostile witness, 
they both knew it. 

“Objection!” Clark shouted. “That’s irrelevant and highly prejudicial!” 

“Sustained.” The judge looked at Erin, and the waving spectacles now 
did not make her face look funny, only grotesque. “Ms. Mendel, this is 
your second violation, and a serious one: that remark also violates the 
court’s pretrial order. You are personally fined five thousand dollars, and 
the plaintiff is sanctioned with removal of your final rebuttal argument.” 
The judge turned toward the juror. ‘You are instructed to disregard Ms. 
Mendel’s remark. The only injury at issue in this case is the plaintiff’s.” 

Then the judge adjourned for the day, and Ephraim looked at her, eyes 
open wide. 

“It went a little better today,” she said. ‘You did great. I’m the one who 
screwed up.” He had actually done better than great. His testimony had 
been the most compelling she had ever seen from the witness stand. She 
could only hope that Calendri, the juror, had seen it the same way. 

Erin closed her eyes. She hadn’t slept more than three hours a night 
since taking this case. Today she had not done much, if anything, to 
shake NeuroTek’s expert testimony. And she had lost one of the few 
plaintiff’s advantages, the opportunity to address the juror last. Tomor¬ 
row would be her final chance. 

Ephraim cleared his throat. She came back to awareness, realized they 
were still at their table, alone in the now-empty courtroom. How long had 
he been sitting there quietly beside her? 

“I. .. didn’t think you understood when you walked out yesterday,” he 
said. “But you did. And you made me ... say it. I didn’t want to—at first 
I was angry. I’m not anymore.” 

“I think I do understand, Ephraim. The problem is I just don’t know 
how to put it into words. Maybe if I tried what you do . . . scan all night, 
find the right images... 

He was shaking his head, then smiled wryly. “A little late to be learn¬ 
ing new tools.” His smile faded. “If you hadn’t stopped me out there ... I 
would have evoked the interface.” He paused, his eyes on her face. ‘You 
have everything you need,” he said finally. “But it doesn’t just come from 
here.” He pointed to his head. “It comes from here, too.” He touched her 
lightly, just below her collarbone, and that brief contact ran through her 
like an electrical current. 

. “Maybe so.” She managed to smile. It would be nice to be able to talk to 

66 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 

him about something beside this case. “This is my problem from here on. 
You should go home, get some rest. Tomorrow’s a big day.” 

“I think we both should get some rest. No more working most of the 
night, okay?” 

How had he known that? “Sure,” she lied. “I’ll go home and get some 
sleep.” 

Ephraim didn’t go home. Instead, he rode the mag-lev out into the 
countryside beneath the darkening sky, getting off finally at a deserted 
ag platform far beyond the urban lights. The leaves of tall crop plants 
whispered in the night breeze beneath billions of stars. The green-scent¬ 
ed darkness between the plants was the darkness that lurked inside his 
head, waiting to eat him. He summoned the access code images, and 
then, face turned to the stars, he banished them. Forever. 

He had made a promise to Erin, in that moment on the stand when she 
had cried out to him to stop. He would go on. The stored data would leak 
slowly through the faulty interface, taking a birthday here, overwriting 
a moment of love or laughter or loss there, until it was all gone. Then, the 
process would end. He would be left with whatever scraps of yesterday 
remained. Enough to know how much he had lost. 

He wondered if he would remember Erin. 

The lights of the city-bound mag-lev appeared on the horizon, sliding 
across the flat land toward him. It was time to go back, if he was going to 
be in court on time. Ephraim turned his back on the beckoning darkness 
and trudged back to the platform. 

Erin closed her eyes and went somewhere else. In bed, sleeping glori¬ 
ously late, in a cabin somewhere in the countryside with real windows. 
The sun is shining outside and quail are calling and a slight breeze lifts 
the drapes. The breeze carries the faint scents of wildflowers and pine 
needles, and from beside her comes the smell of a man and recent sex, 
how a certain man might smell after sex. Ephraim . . . 

She raised her head, opened her eyes, and checked the time: 12:47 P.M. 
She had no time for fantasy. Her chin was wet, there was a sour taste in 
her mouth, and it was not wildflowers nor pine needles nor man-scent 
she smelled, but vomit. She flushed the toilet and went to the sink, wiped 
off her face, rinsed her mouth. She hadn’t thrown up like that for years, 
not since right before her first trial. 

God, she was a mess! A good thing she kept her hair so short; long hair 
hanging into the toilet bowl while you’re puking your guts out could real¬ 
ly spoil the appearance. She checked: 12:52. 

The testimony of NeuroTek’s last two experts that morning had gone 
no better for Ephraim than the day before. Afterward, they had gone to 
lunch; she had just lost what little she had been able to eat. And now, in 


One Good Juror 


67 


February 1997 


five minutes, she had to go in and give the final argument she was 
nowhere near good enough to give. 

Erin wanted nothing so much as to run—down the hall, into the eleva¬ 
tor, out of the building. They couldn’t catch her and make her come back to 
do this. But Ephraim would be left sitting in that courtroom by himself. 

12:58. She had to go now. She walked into the courtroom and when the 
judge called her name she got up and stumbled to the podium, leaned on 
it for support. They were all waiting for her to speak—the juror, the 
judge, Clark, the media reps, a million viewers, Ephraim. Why would any 
sane person put herself through this? It was, like his art, nothing but an 
act of blind and unreasoning courage, like diving from a cliff into a dark, 
unfathomable sea. And all she had were her words. 

It comes from here, Ephraim had said. What does? Then in her mind 
she heard another voice saying, “How do you feel, Erin?” 

It was a question she had asked many, many times of others—jurors, 
clients, witnesses—“how do you feel about. . . ?” Now someone was ask¬ 
ing her, in a man’s voice that was not Ephraim’s. “How do you feel, Erin?” 
A flash of memory ... years ago ... sitting across a restaurant table, her 
answer coming to her lips even before that man who had been her lover 
finished his question. “It doesn’t matter.” He had walked out of her life 
two days later. 

She looked up from the podium and tried to start again. Calendri was 
watching her with an amused, slightly quizzical expression. The vidcams 
in the back of the courtroom rolled on; she was making a fool of herself in 
front of millions of viewers. Letting Ephraim down. 

It comes from here . . . and yes, she could feel something building with 
tremendous pressure in her chest, pushing up at her throat. There must 
be a deep well inside her, she realized. She had thought it had gone dry 
long ago, and then she had backfilled it in with rock and debris. But the 
cavity was still there, under the surface, and it had grown so full that it 
was about to burst. It was pressing on her all around from the inside, and 
now it had to go somewhere.... 

“The truth is, I’m standing up here scared to death.” 

Who said that? Was that her voice? What was she doing?—this was no 
way to start a final argument. 

“I'm so scared, Mr. Calendri, because I’m not the kind of lawyer 
Ephraim Polk needs. The kind he deserves. Because there are only a 
handful of lawyers in the whole country who might be good enough to 
stand up to NeuroTek and all its lawyers and experts and other re¬ 
sources. And I’m not one of them. But I’m all he has.” 

The words seemed nonsense, drivel. Yet somehow, in speaking, she 
found the strength to stand upright and step back from the podium. 

“And I’m scared of the law—that you might think that the law requires 
that you let a corporation escape liability for the injury it caused. That 

68 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


Mr. Clark might convince you that the law says it’s impossible for 
Ephraim Polk to win against NeuroTek, Incorporated. But the truth is, 
the law says it’s up to you to decide if NeuroTek’s implant is defective.” 

As she spoke she walked slowly around the podium to the center of the 
courtroom, into the arena itself, where she had nowhere to hide and car¬ 
ried no arms but her speech and gestures. She stopped two meters from 
the jury box and looked Calendri in the eye. 

She wanted to tell the juror how she had at first been angry about this 
case, because it seemed impossible, and at Ephraim. Tell him how she 
had grown up without parents, surviving on the streets in an urban kid- 
pack; how fear had been so much a part of daily existence that she 
learned to survive by converting fear into anger. So that anger became 
the substitute, the crutch, for every other strong emotion. Until she had 
met a certain man, a client. But if she said those things, Clark might well 
object that her own experience and feelings about her client w.ere not rel¬ 
evant, and the traditional leeway given to lawyers in final argument 
might not be enough to prevent the judge from sanctioning her again. 

So she could only draw upon her old experience and new knowledge of 
her feelings to talk about Ephraim. Through his testimony, Ephraim had 
done that himself, far better than she could do. So she told how 
Ephraim’s art had affected others, how he had, through his images and 
his own unfailing courage and honesty, brought out the true emotions 
that lay inside every human and which we could all share. She talked 
about the tragic, unfulfilled promise of Children’s Crusade, how that 
work above all could have cut directly to the heart of each human being’s 
past. 

And so she tried to make the juror see how the loss of a person’s past, 
the story of who that man really was, affected not only him, but the peo¬ 
ple who knew him. And in so doing, she made him not merely Ephraim 
Polk, famous artist, but Everyman. 

Time passed without her noticing. The words came to her mouth as if 
they had sorted themselves; she had no sense of selecting them or ar¬ 
ranging them into sentences. They only came —and they seemed to be the 
right words, and true. And when she again looked at Calendri, he was fol¬ 
lowing these words. She had his full attention. Perhaps he even looked 
spellbound. 

But her allotted time was almost up, and this was not enough. She 
could not ask for his verdict out of sympathy. Sympathy was the final ap¬ 
peal of the truly desperate. Ephraim deserved better, and this juror 
would need a rationale for finding the implant defective. He was, after 
all, an engineer. His emotions might move him toward a decision, but he 
would only make that decision if he felt good about it intellectually, as 
well as emotionally. He would want to feel good about it himself, and in 
the deliberation room he would also think about whether he could ex- 


One Good Juror 


69 


February 1997 

plain his verdict to friends and colleagues. So she would have to offer a 
rationale—even if it was not as solid as the NeuroTek rationale, with all 
those experts and the law standing behind it. 

She realized all this instinctively, without consciously working it out, 
within the space of a pause that lasted no more than a second. She also 
sensed that whatever instinct or . . . feeling had led Ephraim to choose 
this man, Calendri might have at least one thing they needed to win this 
case: strength, perhaps even courage, of his own. 

“Mr. Clark has made a big point out of NeuroTek’s product warnings, 
how Mr. Polk signed the disclosure. Ephraim did sign up for a NeuroTek 
implant, but does that mean he signed up for memory loss? That he 
agreed to trade the core of himself away, for a few years of doing his art 
more efficiently? 

“NeuroTek’s counsel also suggested—improperly, as the judge said— 
that I use an implant. Well, let’s be honest: I do, and it’s NeuroTek’s, all 
right.” She was taking a risk here, but gambled that Clark wouldn’t have 
the nerve to object, after having opened the door on the subject himself. 
“I obtained an implant because I thought it would help me try cases bet¬ 
ter.—and I, a lawyer, signed one of those disclosures too. Unless you sign, 
they won’t give you one of these magic implants they advertise, that will 
make your whole life better. And you think, those injuries are rare, 
bizarre accidents. It won’t happen to you.” 

Let the juror draw his own conclusions why Clark had not signed up 
for an implant himself. 

“So what NeuroTek has done, you see, instead of making a safer prod¬ 
uct, they’ve tried to insulate themselves with a scrap of paper. It wouldn’t 
have cost much to eliminate the risk of memory loss to users. But it costs 
them almost nothing to circulate a disclosure.” 

There—this was the right track to take with this juror. Now, if she 
could find a finish that blended the emotion and the reason. And the 
words came: 

“NeuroTek’s experts claim that it would take a ‘significant’ amount of 
money to produce an implant that didn’t cause these memory injuries. 
But the key testimony came from Dr. Singh, when Mr. Clark asked him, 
and he said, yes, but that depends on how you define ‘significant.’ The 
judge will give you legal definitions of ‘significant.’ It’s come to the point 
where we rely on a judicial program to tell us bur law. But the law only 
defines the word in abstract terms. It’s up to you to decide whether the 
amount of money NeuroTek talks about is significant in comparison to 
the cost of the story of a human life.” 

Erin did not tell the juror to ignore the law. If she tried to do that, the 
judge would cut her off, make her sit down—tell Calendri to disregard 
her argument. So she had to make the juror understand his own power 
by inference. 


70 


Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


“At least that’s one point we haven’t passed yet. At least we don’t trust 
that program over there to dispense justice. Dispensing justice has al¬ 
ways been an awesome responsibility, but, back in the days when we had 
juries of twelve, it was at least not such a lonely one. That responsibility 
now rests on you and you alone, Mr. Calendri.’’ 

Her time was almost up; less than a minute left. 

“Ephraim Polk doesn’t want your sympathy. We ask you for justice. 
And since justice is never served by the weak or the cowardly, it will take 
courage for you to do justice, all by yourself. It will require you to show as 
much courage as Ephraim Polk showed on the stand here yesterday. 
Maybe more.” 

Then Erin was done. She took her seat, utterly drained. The courtroom 
remained silent for what seemed hours. Finally, Erin glanced up at the 
juror. He was not looking at her or Ephraim, he was staring at the wall 
behind the judge’s image. She looked at Clark, who was immobile, read¬ 
ing the papers in front of him. There was no sound from the media people 
behind her either, not the usual rustle of clothing or rattle of equipment. 

Why wasn’t anyone looking at her? Were they all embarrassed for her? 
Had she made that much of a fool of herself ? 

“Interesting summation,” the judge finally said. She had removed her 
spectacles and held them in front of her chin, which only seemed to pull 
her features into an expression of thoughtful repose. “I have never before 
had counsel refer to me as ‘that program over there.’ It may border on 
disrespect for the court, but I cannot find any precedent that holds it im¬ 
proper. And it cannot be said that your words were untrue.” 

Erin thought the judge’s own comment was unprecedented, at least in 
her experience. The judge’s visage turned from Erin to Clark. “Very well, 
then. Mr. Clark, you may proceed.” 

Clark commenced his own summation from the podium in a steady, 
wooden voice; she knew he would talk about the law and interface de¬ 
signs and relative costs, but Erin could not follow his words. She noted 
only that as Clark proceeded, his voice and gestures gained conviction, 
and that Calendri seemed to be following the defense argument with 
close attention. 

I am finished, Erin thought. There is nothing more 1 can do. It was not 
enough. Yet, it was all I had. And I don’t know if I can ever do that again. 

She looked at Ephraim, who was paying no attention to Clark, only 
watching her. Their eyes connected and she could feel the well start to fill 
again. 

I know I could never do that again, by myself. 

“I’ll have to go visit him after this is over. My father. I ... I want to 
know what he thinks of me. Who we were—father and son.” Ephraim 
spoke to the cup of tea in front of him, noticing with one part of his mind 


One Good Juror 


71 


February 1997 


the tiny hairline fractures that had begun to craze the white ceramic. 
Across the table, Erin remained silent, toying with one of the small fruit- 
filled muffins that the waitress had served with their tea. 

She believed they had lost. Derocher had been right to drop his case. 
Ephraim turned his cup slowly on its saucer, watching her surreptitious¬ 
ly. Her face had taken on a gaunt quality, as if she had lost weight in the 
last forty-eight hours. She looked exhausted and . . . beautiful. Last 
night’s sadness pierced him and he covered the moment by sipping at his 
cooling tea. In an hour, maybe less, it would be over, one way or another. 
Success or failure, she would put this trial behind her and go on to the 
next case. She would forget him. He would forget her. 

He didn’t want to forget her. 

“I thought lawyers played tricks with words and laws.” His words 
limped, rough and halting. “I thought that was all . . . there was to it. I 
didn’t realize ... what you could do. You made Calendri hear it, I think— 
what it means to me. You made him understand.” He spread his hands, 
shaken by a sudden sense of impending loss. “Whether the decision goes 
for us or against us, it was . . . art. I just want you to know that.” 

She looked up, finally, her sea-colored eyes flecked with gold in the 
light from the window, a similar sadness shadowing her face. “Thank 
you,” she said. “Whatever happens this afternoon, don’t stop creating 
your collages. No, wait.” She leaned forward to lay two fingers against his 
lips, stilling the denial he had been about to utter. “Even if you have no 
past, you are still human. You still have a soul. You told me about raising 
that puppy the day you came to my office—how much it mattered to you 
that it live. What you said moved me, in a way I. .. don’t usually let my¬ 
self be moved.” A faint blush tinged her pale cheeks and she shook her 
head. ‘That passion is still part of you, Ephraim. You still have your vi¬ 
sion and your drive to make it live. You simply see things from a different 
perspective than before. I know this,” she said urgently. “Your strength 
is still there, even if you have to use fewer images. Trust yourself, 
Ephraim.” 

She took her hand away abruptly, her pupils contracting, eyes fixing 
on the wall behind him. “It’s time to go back. The judge says the juror has 
reached a verdict.” She held out her hand with a wan smile. “Wish us 
luck. We sure did our best.” 

He took it, trapped by the formality of dishes, and table linens, and the 
other diners. “Thanks,” he said hoarsely. “Win or lose ... thank you.” 

They got to their feet in unison and filed between the tables, barely no¬ 
ticed by the incurious diners. 

Word had spread that a verdict was being returned, and Erin and 
Ephraim had to shove through an even larger crowd of media people at 
the courtroom door. They took their places in silence before the bench. 
Clark was already in his seat, managing to look triumphant in spite of 

72 Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


his businesslike demeanor. Ephraim stifled a brief anger against the 
man who wouldn’t take any risks himself but was willing to defend the 
companies that took advantage of those who would. The judge was wait¬ 
ing for them to be seated, peering over her old-fashioned glasses. “That 
program,” Erin had called her. Remembering her defense of the AI sys¬ 
tem in her office, Ephraim stifled a smile. The judge raised her eyebrows 
at Ephraim and cleared her throat. 

“Counsel for both parties are present, and we are back on record in the 
matter of Polk v. NeuroTek, Inc." She called in the juror, and everyone 
waited for Calendri to resume his seat. 

“Have you reached a verdict?” the judge asked. 

Calendri’s expression remained serious and unreadable. Ephraim had 
meant to watch him as Erin delivered her final argument, but her words 
had caught him up and he had forgotten Calendri entirely. 

Ephraim found himself holding his breath. If they lost—it would be 
Erin’s failure. She would never let it be anything else. That smug bastard 
Clark would smile at her, and that smile would pierce something vital in¬ 
side her—maybe cripple it forever. For one brief moment, he wished he 
had taken Derocher’s advice and settled out of court. Wanting to take her 
hand, Ephraim scrubbed his sweaty palms on his thighs instead. Calen¬ 
dri stood slowly and deliberately and faced the judge, not immune to the 
drama of the moment. 

“Yes, Your Honor,” Calendri replied. With his notepad, he uploaded his 
verdict to the judge. 

The judge seemed to study it for an eternity before speaking. “The ver¬ 
dict is in proper form. I will now publish it: T, Peter G. Calendri, the juror 
duly empowered to decide this case, make the following verdict on the is¬ 
sue submitted to me.’” 

Ephraim glanced at Erin; she had her eyes closed and head bowed. 

“Question: ‘Was the NeuroTek cerebral implant defectively designed or 
manufactured?’ Answer: ‘Yes.’ Is that your verdict, Mr. Calendri?” 

“Yes, it is,” Calendri said, without a trace of uncertainty. 

Defective. For a moment, no one seemed to understand. Then the hiss 
of indrawn breath sounded from behind and all around Ephraim, as if 
the courtroom itself were sighing. And it hit him—they had won! Erin 
had won. At his table, Clark made a sudden sharp gesture, his face 
briefly darkening. Erin let her breath out in a tiny, nearly inaudible sigh 
as a buzz of conversation filled the back of the courtroom. From the 
bench, the judge continued, using her severe tone for silence. 

“Causation and injury having been stipulated by the defendant, final 
judgment is hereby awarded in the amount of plaintiff’s stipulated and 
statutory damages for medical expenses, lost income, and pain and suf¬ 
fering. Proceedings are now concluded.” 

Ephraim barely heard her. “You did it!” He flung his arms around 

One Good Juror 73 


February 1997 


Erin, grinning at her startled expression. “You won this, because you 
made him listen beyond the mere words.” And he kissed her. Hard. For 
real. 

For an instant, she stood stiffly in his embrace, then, suddenly, her 
posture softened, and she was kissing him back. That knot of sadness in 
his gut rose up inside Ephraim like a wave, bittersweet and piercing. And 
he hid it. It would be unfair to her to let her see it. 

Someone cleared their throat behind them, and Ephraim released 
Erin, his face heating. “I’m sorry,” he said. She was smiling faintly, but it 
was a crooked, almost pained smile. 

“I wanted to shake your hand.” Calendri was standing there, a slightly 
amused expression on his face. “I don’t care much about art, but I’ve 
worked hard all my life, and I make a good living. I’ve taken a lot of 
chances to get where I am.” He nodded. “If you’re willing to risk yourself 
for what you believe in, you don’t need somebody stacking the deck 
against you.” Calendri shrugged. “I had trouble following Dr. Singh’s tes¬ 
timony the first time, but I’ve worked with enough scientists to know 
that a lot of good ones can’t communicate worth a damn. So in the delib¬ 
eration room I reviewed the court recordings a couple of times, and final¬ 
ly decided he knows his stuff better than those experts hired by Neu- 
roTek.” He held out his hand. “Good luck. I hope you make out okay.” 

‘Thank you.” Ephraim returned the man’s firm grip. 

Calendri nodded again, turned on his heel, and strode briskly up the 
aisle. 

“Congratulations, Counselor.” Clark paused on his way out of the 
courtroom, briefcase under one arm, assistants lined up behind him, and 
his mouth twitching as he spoke. ‘Though I doubt that verdict will stand 
on appeal.” 

Ephraim decided that comment had really been aimed at him, and it 
sounded none too confident. “Why not?” Ephraim met his eyes. “I have 
the best lawyer.” 

Clark grunted, shrugged, and marched up the aisle. The courtroom 
was empty now, except for the two of them. The judge’s image had van¬ 
ished. Erin was looking at him oddly, and he felt himself blushing again. 
“I’m sorry,” he said again. Lamely. “What about their appeal? What do 
we do now?” 

“I don’t think NeuroTek has a chance. The judge didn’t make any legal 
errors, and the appellate courts are doing all they can to protect what’s 
left of the jury system.” She looked away, her eyes focused on the empty 
bench. “I can refer you to a colleague of mine. She’s a marvelous appel¬ 
late lawyer. She’ll...” 

“Wait a minute!” He seized her arm, felt her flinch. “You’re quitting? 
Why?” His sudden anguish roughened his voice. “I didn’t mean to get so 
... physical just now, if that’s the trouble.” 


74 


Mary Rosenblum & James Sarafin 


Asimov's 


“That’s not the trouble.” She smiled crookedly, still refusing to look at 
him. “I let myself. . . get emotionally involved. I’m . . . not objective any¬ 
more. I just can’t continue to represent you.” 

Not objective anymore. He looked down at his hand on her arm, pulled 
her gently around to face him. “What are you saying?” he asked softly. 

“I... ” 

“No, forget it. Don’t say anything.” He laid his fingers on her lips, grin¬ 
ning like an idiot. ‘Words don’t mean anything. Not; yet, anyway.” Then 
he took her face between his hands and kissed her again. Slowly. 

And felt her smile. • 



Attention CompuServe customers: hove you visited our Forum? 
GO SFLIT, select "Messages" and then "Browse" down to Section 
17, ANALOG & ASIMOV'S MAGS, to see what's coming up in 
future issues. You can participate in discussions and debates with 
fellow readers, and even a few of our authors, who make 
regular appearances; comment on editorial material; participate 
in contests; and much more. Don't miss it! 


One Good Juror 


75 










February 1997 


James Alan Gardner 


ME HERRINGS ON THE 
EXISTENCE OF SNARES IN 
THE HUMAN BLOODSTREAM 


James Alan Gardner lives in Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, 
with his wife Linda Carson. He has published numerous 
pieces of short fiction in such places as Amazing, F&SF, 
OnSpec, and Tesseracts. In his spare time he plays piano, 
practices kung fu, and recovers from bruises. The following 
tale is his first for Asimov's. 


Illustrations by Steve Cavallo 

1. Concerning an Arrangement of Lenses, So Fashioned as to Magnify the 
View of Divers Animalcules, Too Tiny to be Seen with the Unaided Eye: 

H is Holiness, Supreme Patriarch Septus XXIV, was an expert on 
chains. 

By holy law, chains were required on every defendant brought to the 
Court Immaculate. However, my Lord the Jailer could exercise great 
latitude in choosing which chains went on which prisoners. A man pos¬ 
sessed of a healthy fortune might buy his way into nothing more than a 
gold link necklace looped loosely around his throat; a beautiful woman 
might visit the Jailer privately in his chambers and emerge with thin 
and glittering silver bracelets—chains, yes, but as delicate as thread. If, 
on the other hand, the accused could offer neither riches nor position nor 


76 





Asimov's 


generous physical charms ... well then, the prison had an ample supply 
of leg-irons, manacles, and other such fetters, designed to show these ver¬ 
min the grim weight of God’s justice. 

The man currently standing before Patriarch Septus occupied a sel¬ 
dom-seen middle ground in the quantity of restraints: two solid hand¬ 
cuffs joined by an iron chain of business-like gauge, strong enough that 
the prisoner had no chance of breaking free, but not so heavy as to strain 
the man’s shoulders to the point of pain. Clearly, my Lord the Jailer had 
decided on a cautious approach to this particular case; and Septus won¬ 
dered what that meant. Perhaps the accused was nobody himself but had 
sufficient connections to rule out unwarranted indignities ... a sculptor 
or musician, for example, who had won favor with a few great households 
in the city. The man certainly had an artistic look—fierce eyes in an im¬ 
practical face, the sort of high-strung temperament who could express 
passion but not use it. 

“Be it known to the court,” cried the First Attendant, “here stands one 
Anton Leeuwenhoek, a natural philosopher who is accused of heresy 
against God and Our L!ady, the Unbetombed Virgin. Kneel, Supplicant, 
and pray with his Holiness, that this day shall see justice.” 

Septus waited to see what Leeuwenhoek would do. When thieves and 
murderers came before the court, they dropped to their knees immedi¬ 
ately, making gaudy show of begging God to prove their innocence. A 
heretic, however, might spit defiance or hurl curses at the Patriarchal 
throne—not a good way to win mercy, but then, many heretics came to 
this chamber intent on their own martyrdom. Leeuwenhoek had the eyes 
of such a fanatic, but apparently not the convictions; without so much as 
a grimace, he got to his knees and bowed his head. The Patriarch quickly 
closed his own eyes and intoned the words he had recited five times pre¬ 
viously this morning: “God grant me the wisdom to perceive the truth. 
Blessed Virgin, grant me the judgment to serve out meet justice. Let us 
all act this day to the greater glory of Thy Divine Union. Amen.” 

Amens sounded around the chamber: attendants and advocates follow¬ 
ing the form. Septus glanced sideways toward Satan’s Watchboy, an omi¬ 
nous title for a cheerfully freckle-faced youth, the one person here ex¬ 
cused from closing his eyes during the prayer. The Watchboy nodded 
twice, indicating that Leeuwenhoek had maintained a proper attitude of 
prayer and said Amen with everyone else. Good—this had just become a 
valid trial, and anything that happened from this point on had the 
strength of heavenly authority. 

“My Lord Prosecutor,” Septus said, “state the charges.” 

The prosecutor bowed as deeply as his well-rounded girth allowed, 
perspiration already beading on his powdered forehead. It was not a 
hot day, early spring, nothing more .. . but Prosecutor ben Jacob was a 
man famous for the quantity of his sweat, a trait that usually bothered 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


77 


Februory 1997 

his legal adversaries more than himself. Many an opposing counsel had 
been distracted by the copious flow streaming down ben Jacob’s face, 
thereby overlooking flaws in the prosecutor’s arguments. One could al¬ 
ways find flaws in ben Jacob’s arguments, Septus knew—dear old 
Abraham was not overly clever. He was, however, honest, and could not 
conceive of winning personal advancement at the expense of those he 
prosecuted; therefore, the Patriarch had never dismissed the man from 
his position. 

“Your Holiness,” ben Jacob said, “this case concerns claims against the 
Doctrine of the, uhh ... Sleeping Snake.” 

“Ah.” Septus glanced over at Leeuwenhoek. “My son, do you truly deny 
God’s doctrine?” 

The man shrugged. “I have disproved the doctrine. Therefore, it can 
hardly be God’s.” 

Several attendants gasped loudly. They perceived it as part of their job 
to show horror at every sacrilege. The same attendants tended to whis¬ 
per and make jokes during the descriptions of true horrors: murders, 
rapes, maimings. ‘The spectators will remain silent,” Septus said weari¬ 
ly. He had recited those words five times this morning too. “My Lord 
Prosecutor, will you please read the text?” 

“Ummm . .. the text, yes, the text.” 

Septus maintained his composure while ben Jacob shuffled through 
papers and parchments looking for what he needed. It was, of course, 
standard procedure to read any passages of scripture that a heretic de¬ 
nied, just to make sure there was no misunderstanding. It was also stan¬ 
dard procedure for ben Jacob to misplace his copy of the relevant text in a 
pile of other documents. With any other prosecutor, this might be some 
kind of strategy; with ben Jacob, it was simply disorganization. 

“Here we are, yes, here we are,” he said at last, producing a dog-eared 
page with a smear of grease clearly visible along one edge. “Gospel of Su¬ 
sannah, chapter twenty-three, first verse.” Ben Jacob paused while the 
two Verification Attendants found the passage in their own scripture 
books. They would follow silently as he read the text aloud, ready to catch 
any slips of the tongue that deviated from the holy word. When the at¬ 
tendants were ready, ben Jacob cleared his throat and read: 

After the procession ended, they withdrew to a garden outside the walls 
of Jerusalem. And in the evening, it happened that Matthias beheld a ser¬ 
pent there, hidden by weeds. He therefore took up a stone that he might 
crush the beast; but Mary stayed his hand, saying, “There is no danger, 
for look, the beast sleeps. ” 

“Teacher,"Matthias answered, “it will not sleep forever.” 

“Verily,”said Mary, “Ipromise it will sleep till dawn; and when the 
dawn comes, we will leave this place and all the serpents that it holds.” 


78 


James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 

Yet still, Matthias kept hold of the stone and gazed upon the serpent 
with fear. 

“O ye of little faith,"said Mary to Matthias, “why do you concern your¬ 
self with the sleeping creature before you, when you are blind to the ser¬ 
pents in your own heart ? For I tell you, each drop of your blood courses 
with a legion of serpents, and so it is for every Child of Dust. You are all 
poisoned with black venoms, poisoned unto death. But if you believe in 
me, I will sing those serpents to sleep; then will they slumber in peace un¬ 
til you leave this flesh behind, entering into the dawn of God’s new day.” 

Ben Jacob lowered his page and looked to the Verifiers for their confir¬ 
mation. The Patriarch turned in their direction too, but he didn’t need 
their nods to tell him the scripture had been read correctly. Septus knew 
the passage by heart; it was one of the fundamental texts of Mother 
Church, the Virgin’s promise of salvation. It was also one of the most pop¬ 
ular texts for heretics to challenge. The presumption of original sin, of 
damnation being inherent in human flesh . . . that was anathema to 
many a fiery young soul. What kind of God, they asked, would damn an 
infant to hell merely for being born? It was a good question, its answer 
still the subject of much subtle debate; but the Virgin’s words were un¬ 
equivocal, whether or not theologians had reasoned out all the implica¬ 
tions. 

“Anton Leeuwenhoek,” Septus said, “you have heard the verified word 
of scripture. Do you deny its truth?” 

Leeuwenhoek stared directly back. “I must,” he answered. “I have ex¬ 
amined human blood in meticulous detail. It contains no serpents.” 

The toadies in the courtroom had their mouths open, ready to gasp 
again at sacrilege; but even they could hear the man was not speaking in 
deliberate blasphemy. He seemed to be stating ... a fact. 

How odd. 

Septus straightened slightly in the Patriarchal throne. This had the 
prospect of more interest than the usual heresy trial. “You understand,” 
he said to Leeuwenhoek, “this passage is about original sin. The Blessed 
Virgin states that all human beings are poisoned with sin and can only 
be redeemed through her.” 

“On the contrary, Your Holiness.” Leeuwenhoek’s voice was sharp. 
“The passage states there are snakes in human blood. I know there are 
not.” 

‘The snakes are merely . . .” Septus stopped himself in time. He had 
been on the verge of saying the snakes were merely a metaphor; but this 
was a public trial, and any pronouncements he made would have the 
force of law. To declare that any part of scripture was not the literal truth 
... no Patriarch had ever done so in open forum, and Septus did not in¬ 
tend to be the first. 


Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


79 


February 1997 



“Let us be clear on this point,” Septus said to Leeuwenhoek. “Do you 
deny the Doctrine of Original Sin?” 

“No—I could never make heads or tails of theology. What I understand 
is blood; and there are no snakes in it.” 

One of the toadies ventured a small gasp of horror, but even a deaf 
man could have told the sound was forced. 

Prosecutor ben Jacob, trying to be helpful, said, "You must appreciate 
that the snakes would be very, very small.” 

“That’s just it,” Leeuwenhoek answered with sudden enthusiasm. “I 
have created a device that makes it possible to view tiny things as if they 
were much larger.” He turned quickly toward Septus. “Your Holiness is 
familiar with the telescope? The device for viewing objects at long dis¬ 
tances?” 


James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 


The Patriarch nodded in spite of himself. 

“My device,” Leeuwenhoek said, “functions on a similar principle—an 
arrangement of lenses that amplify one’s vision to reveal things too small 
to see with the naked eye. I have examined blood in every particular; and 
while it contains numerous minute animalcules I cannot identify, I swear 
to the court there are no snakes. Sleeping or otherwise.” 

“Mm.” Septus took a moment to fold his hands on the bench in front of 
him. When he spoke, he did not meet the prisoner’s eyes. “It is well- 
known that snakes are adept at hiding, are they not? Surely it is possible 
that a snake could be concealed behind ... behind these other minute an¬ 
imalcules you mention.” 

“A legion of serpents,” Leeuwenhoek said stubbornly. “That’s what the 
text said. A legion of serpents in every drop of blood. Surely they couldn’t 
all find a place to hide; and I have spent hundreds of hours searching, 
Your Holiness. Days and weeks and months.” 

“Mm.” 

Troublesome to admit, Septus didn’t doubt the man. The Patriarch had 
scanned the skies with an excellent telescope, and had seen a universe of 
unexpected wonders—mountains on the moon, hair on the sun, rings 
around the planet Cronus. He could well believe Leeuwenhoek’s magnifi¬ 
er would reveal similar surprises ... even if it didn’t show serpents in the 
bloodstream. The serpents were merely a parable anyway; who could 
doubt it? Blessed Mary often spoke in poetic language that every educat¬ 
ed person recognized as symbolic rather than factual. 

Unfortunately, the church was not composed of educated persons. No 
matter how sophisticated the clergy might be, parishioners came from 
humbler stock. Snakes in the blood? If that’s what Mary said, it must be 
true; and heaven help a Patriarch who took a less dogmatic stance. The 
bedrock of the church was Authority: ecclesiastic authority, scriptural au¬ 
thority. If Septus publicly allowed that some doctrines could be inter¬ 
preted as mere symbolism—that a fundamental teaching was metaphor, 
not literal fact—well, all it took was a single hole in a wineskin for every¬ 
thing to leak out. 

On the other hand, truth was truth. If there were no snakes, there 
were no snakes. God made the world and all the people in it; if the Cre¬ 
ator chose to fashion human lifeblood a certain way, it was the duty of 
Mother Church to accept and praise Him for it. Clinging to a lie in order 
to preserve one’s authority was worse than mere cowardice; it was the 
most damning blasphemy. 

Septus looked at Leeuwenhoek, standing handcuffed in tbe dock. A liv¬ 
ing man with a living soul; and with one word, Septus could have him ex¬ 
ecuted as a purveyor of falsehood. 

But where did the falsehood truly lie? 

“This case cannot be decided today,” Septus announced. “Mother 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 81 


February 1997 


Church will investigate the claims of the accused to the fullest extent of 
her strength. We will build magnifier devices of our own, properly 
blessed to protect against Satan’s interference.” Septus fought back a 
smile at that; there were still some stuffy inquisitors who believed the 
devil distorted what one saw through any lens. “We shall see what is 
there and what is not.” 

Attendants nodded in agreement around the courtroom, just as they 
would nod if the sentence had been immediate acquittal or death. But 
ben Jacob said, “Your Holiness—perhaps it would be best if the court 
were to ... to issue instructions that no other person build a magnifica¬ 
tion device until the church has ruled in this matter.” 

“On the contrary,” Septus replied. “I think the church should make 
magnifiers available to all persons who ask. Let them see for themselves.” 

The Patriarch smiled, wondering if ben Jacob understood. A decree 
suppressing magnifiers would simply encourage dissidents to build them 
in secret; on the other hand, providing free access to such devices would 
bring the curious into the church, not drive them away. Anyway, the 
question would only interest the leisured class, those with time and en¬ 
ergy to wonder about esoteric issues. The great bulk of the laity, farmers 
and miners and ostlers, would never hear of the offer. Even if they did, 
they would hardly care. Minute animalcules might be amusing curiosi¬ 
ties, but they had nothing to do with a peasant’s life. 

Another pause for prayer and then Leeuwenhoek was escorted away to 
instruct church scholars in how to build his magnification device. The 
man seemed happy with the outcome—more than escaping a death sen¬ 
tence, he would now have the chance to show others what he’d seen. Sep¬ 
tus had met many men like that: grown-up children, looking for colorful 
shells on the beach and touchingly grateful when someone else took an 
interest in their sandy little collections. 

As for Leeuwenhoek’s original magnifier—Septus had the device 
brought to his chambers when the court recessed at noon. Blood was easy 
to come by: one sharp jab from a pin and the Patriarch had his sample to 
examine. Eagerly he peered through the viewing lens, adjusting the fo¬ 
cus in the same way as a telescope. 

Animalcules. How remarkable. 

Tiny, tiny animalcules . . . countless schools of them, swimming in his 
own blood. What wonders God had made! Creatures of different shapes 
and sizes, perhaps predators and prey, like the fishes that swam in the 
ocean. 

And were there snakes? The question was almost irrelevant. And yet 
. . . very faintly, so close to invisible that it might be a trick of the eye, 
something as thin as a hair seemed to flit momentarily across the 
view. 

Then it was gone. 


82 


James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 


2. The Origin of Serpentine Analogues in the Blood of Papist Peoples: 

Her Britannic Majesty, Anne VI, rather liked the Star Chamber. True, 
its power had been monstrously abused at times in the past five cen¬ 
turies—secret trials leading to secret executions of people who were prob¬ 
ably more innocent than the monarchs sitting on the judgment seat—but 
even in the glorious Empire, there was a place for this kind of hearing. 
The queen on this side of the table, one of her subjects on the other ... it 
had the air of a private chat between friends: a time when difficulties 
could get sorted out, one way or another. 

“Well, Mr. Darwin,” she said after the tea had been poured, “it seems 
you’ve stirred up quite a hornet’s nest. Have you not?” 

The fiercely bearded man across the table did not answer immediately. 
He laid a finger on the handle of his cup as if to drink or not to drink was 
some momentous decision; then he said, “I have simply spoken the truth, 
ma’am ... as I see it.” 

“Yes; but different people see different truths, don’t they? And a great 
many are upset by the things you say are true. You are aware there has 
been ... unpleasantness?” 

“I know about the riots, ma’am. Several times they have come uncom¬ 
fortably close to me. And of course, there have been threats on my life.” 

“Indeed.” Anne lifted a tiny slice of buttered bread and took what she 
hoped would seem a thoughtful nibble. For some reason, she always en¬ 
joyed eating in front of the accused here in the Star Chamber; they them¬ 
selves never had any appetite at all. “The threats are one reason We in¬ 
vited you here today. Scotland Yard is growing rather weary of protecting 
you; and Sir Oswald has long pondered whether your life is worth it.” 

That got the expected reaction—Darwin’s finger froze on the cup han¬ 
dle, the color draining away from his face. “I had not realized. . . .” His 
eyes narrowed. “I perceive, ma’am, that someone will soon make a deci¬ 
sion on this issue.” 

“Exactly,” the queen said. “Sir Oswald has turned to the crown for 
guidance, and now We turn to you.” She took another tiny bite of the 
bread. “It would be good of you to explain your theories—to lay out the 
train of reasoning that led to your . .. unsettling public statements.” 

“It’s all laid out in my book, ma’am.” 

“But your book is for scientists, not queens.” Anne set down the bread 
and allowed herself a small sip of tea. She took her time doing so, but 
Darwin remained silent. “Please,” she said at last. “We wish to make an 
informed decision.” 

Darwin grunted ... or perhaps it was a hollow chuckle of cynicism. An 
ill-bred sound in either case. “Very well, Your Majesty,” he nodded. “It is 
simply a matter of history.” 

“History is seldom simple, Mr. Darwin; but proceed.” 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


83 


February 1997 

“In . . . 1430-something, I forget the exact year, Anton Leeuwenhoek 
appeared before Supreme Patriarch Septus to discuss the absence of 
snakes in the bloodstream. You are familiar with that, ma’am?” 

“Certainly. It was the pivotal event in the Schism between Our church 
and the Papists.” 

“Just so.” 

Anne could see Darwin itching to leap off his chair and begin prowling 
about the room, like a professor lecturing to a class of dull-lidded school¬ 
boys. His strained impetuosity amused her; but she hoped he would keep 
his impulses in check. ‘Tray continue, Mr. Darwin.” 

“It is common knowledge that the Patriarch’s decision led to a ... a del¬ 
uge, shall we say, of people peering at their own blood through a micro¬ 
scope. Only the upper classes at first, but soon enough it spread to the 
lower levels of society too. Since the church allowed anyone to look into a 
microscope without cost, I suppose it was a free source of amusement for 
the peasantry.” 

“An opiate for the masses,” Anne offered. She rather liked the phrase— 
Mr. Marx had used it when he had his little visit to the Star Chamber. 

“I suppose that must be it,” Darwin agreed. “At any rate, the phenom¬ 
enon far outstripped anything Septus could have foreseen; and even 
worse for the Patriarchy, it soon divided the church into two camps— 
those who claimed to see snakes in their blood and those who did not.” 

“Mr. Darwin, We are well aware of the fundamental difference be¬ 
tween Papists and the Redeemed.” 

“Begging your pardon, ma’am, but I believe the usual historical inter¬ 
pretation is ... flawed. It confuses cause and effect.” 

“How can there be confusion?” Anne asked. “Papists have serpents in 
their blood; that is apparent to any child looking into a microscope. We Re¬ 
deemed have no such contaminants; again, that is Simple observational 
fact. The obvious conclusion, Mr. Darwin, is that Christ Herself marked 
the Papists with Her curse, to show one and all the error of their ways.” 

“According to the Papists,” Darwin reminded her, “the snakes are a 
sign of God’s blessing: a sleeping snake means sin laid to rest.” 

“Is that what you think, Mr. Darwin?” 

“I think it more practical to examine the facts before making any judg¬ 
ment.” 

“That is why we are here today,” Anne said with a pointed glance. 
“Facts . . . and judgment. If you could direct yourself to the heart of the 
matter, Mr. Darwin?” 

‘The heart of the matter,” he repeated. “Of course. I agree that today 
any microscope will show that Papists have snakes in their bloodstream 
... or as scientists prefer to call them, serpentine analogues, since it is 
highly unlikely the observed phenomena are actual reptiles—” 

“Let us not bandy nomenclature,” Anne interrupted. “We accept that 


James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 


the entities in Papist blood are unrelated to cobras and puff adders; but 
they have been called snakes for centuries, and the name is adequate. 
Proceed to your point, Mr. Darwin.” 

“You have just made my point for me, ma’am. Five centuries have 
passed since the original controversy arose. What we see now may not be 
what people saw then." He took a deep breath. “If you read the literature 
of that long-ago time, you find there was great doubt about the snakes, 
even among the Papists. Serpentine analogues were extremely rare and 
difficult to discern .. . unlike the very obvious entities seen today.” 

“Surely that can be blamed on the equipment,” Anne said. “Micro¬ 
scopes of that day were crude contrivances compared to our fine modern 
instruments.” 

“That is the usual argument,” Darwin nodded, “but I believe there is a 
different explanation.” 

“Yes?” 

“My argument, ma’am, is based on my observations of pigeons.” 

Anne blinked. “Pigeons, Mr. Darwin?” She blinked again. ‘The birds?” 
She bit her lip. ‘The filthy things that perch on statues?” 

“Not wild pigeons, Your Majesty, domestic ones. Bred for show. For ex¬ 
ample, some centuries ago, a squire in Sussex took it into his head to 
breed a black pigeon from his stock of gray ones.” 

“Why ever would he want a black pigeon?” 

‘That remains a mystery to me too, ma’am; but the historical records 
are clear. He set about the task by selecting pigeons of the darkest gray 
he could find, and breeding them together. Over many generations, their 
color grew darker and darker until today, the squire’s descendants boast 
of pigeons as black as coal.” 

“They boast of that?” 

“Incessantly.” 

Darwin seized up a piece of bread and virtually stuffed it into his 
mouth. The man had apparently become so engrossed in talking, he had 
forgotten who sat across the table. Good, Anne thought; he would be less 
guarded. 

“We understand the principles of animal husbandry,” Anne said. “We 
do not, however, see how this pertains to the Papists.” 

“For the past five centuries, Your Majesty, the Papists have been going 
through exactly the same process ... as have the Redeemed, for that 
matter. Think, ma’am. In any population, there are numerous chance dif¬ 
ferences between individuals; the squire’s pigeons, for example, had vary¬ 
ing shades of gray. If some process of selection chooses to emphasize a 
particular trait as desirable, excluding other traits as undesirable—if you 
restrict darker birds to breeding with one another and prevent lighter 
ones from contributing to the bloodline—the selected characteristic will 
tend to become more pronounced with each generation.” 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


85 


February 1997 



“You are still talking about pigeons, Mr. Darwin.” 

“No, ma’am,” he said triumphantly, “I am talking about Papists and 
the Redeemed. Let us suppose that in the times of Patriarch Septus, 
some people had almost imperceptible serpentine analogues in their 
bloodstream—a chance occurrence, just as some people may have curls in 
their hair while others do not.” 

Anne opened her mouth to say that curls were frequently not a chance 
occurrence at all; but she decided to remain silent. 

“Now,” Darwin continued, “what happened among the people of that 
day? Some saw those tiny, almost invisible snakes; others did not. Those 
who saw them proclaimed, This proves the unshakable word of Mother 
Church. Those who saw nothing said, The scriptures cannot be taken lit¬ 
erally—believers must find the truth in their own hearts. And so the 
Schism split the world, pitting one camp against another.” 


86 


James Alan Gardner 




Asimov's 


“Yes, Mr. Darwin, We know all that.” 

“So, ma’am, you must also know what happened in subsequent gener¬ 
ations. The rift in belief created a similar rift in the population. Papists 
only married Papists. The Redeemed only married the Redeemed.” 

“Of course.” 

“Consequently,” Darwin stressed the word, “those who could see so- 
called snakes in their blood only married those of similar condition. 
Those who saw nothing married others who saw nothing. Is it any won¬ 
der that, generation by generation, snakes became more and more visi¬ 
ble in Papist blood? And less and less likely to be seen in the Re¬ 
deemed? It is simply a matter of selective breeding, ma’am. The Papists 
are not different from us because the Virgin put her mark on them; 
they are different because they selected to make themselves different. 
To emphasize the difference. And the Redeemed have no snakes in their 
blood for the same reason—simply a side effect of our ancestors’ marital 
prejudice.” 

“Mr. Darwin!” Anne said, aghast. “Such claims! No wonder you have 
angered the Papists as much as your own countrymen. To suggest that 
God’s sacred sign is a mere barnyard accident...The Queen caught her 
breath. “Sir, where is your decency?” 

“I have something better than decency,” he answered in a calm voice. 
“I have proof.” 

“Proof? How could you prove such a thing?” 

“Some years ago, ma’am,” he said, “I took passage on a ship sailing the 
South Seas; and during that voyage, I saw things that completely opened 
my eyes.” 

“More pigeons, Mr. Darwin?” 

He waved his hand dismissively. ‘The birds of the Pacific Islands are 
hardly fit study for a scientist. What I observed were the efforts of mis¬ 
sionaries, ma’am; both Papists and the Redeemed, preaching to the na¬ 
tives who lived in those isles. Have you heard of such missions?” 

“We sponsor several of those missions personally, Mr. Darwin.” 

“And the results, ma’am?” 

“Mixed,” Anne confessed. “Some tribes are open to Redemption, while 
others . ..” she shrugged. ‘The Papists do no better.” 

“Just so, Your Majesty. As an example, I visited one island where the 
Papists had been established for thirty years, yet the local priest claimed 
to have made no true converts. Mark that word, true. Many of the natives 
espoused Papist beliefs, took part in Papist worship, and so on ... but the 
priest could find no snakes in their blood, so he told himself they had not 
truly embraced Mother Church.” 

“You would argue with the priest’s conclusion?” 

“Certainly,” Darwin replied. “In my eyes, the island tribe was simply a 
closed population that for reasons of chance never developed serpentine 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


87 


February 1997 

analogues in their blood. If you interbreed only white pigeons, you will 
never develop a black.” 

Anne said, “But—” then stopped stone-still, as the words of a recent 
mission report rose in her mind. We are continually frustrated in our 
work on this island; although the people bow before God’s altar, their 
blood continues to show the serpent-stain of the Unclean.... 

“Mr. Darwin,” Anne murmured, “could there possibly be islands where 
all the people had snakes in their blood, regardless of their beliefs?” 

“There are indeed, ma’am,” Darwin nodded. “Almost all the island pop¬ 
ulations are isolated and homogeneous. I found some tribes with snakes, 
some without—no matter which missionaries ministered there. When 
the Papists land among a people who already have analogues in their 
bloodstream, they soon declare that they have converted the tribe and 
hold great celebrations. However, when they land among a people whose 
blood is clear . . . well, they can preach all they want, but they won’t 
change the effects of generations of breeding. Usually, they just give up 
and move on to another island where the people are more receptive . . . 
which is to say, where they have the right blood to begin with.” 

“Ah.” 

Anne lowered her eyes. Darwin had been speaking about the Pa¬ 
pists, but she knew the same was true of Redeemed missionaries. They 
tended to stay a year in one place, do a few blood tests, then move on if 
they could not show results—because results were exclusively mea¬ 
sured in blood rather than what the people professed. If missionaries, 
her own missionaries, had been abandoning sincere believers because 
they didn’t believe the conversions were “true” . . . what would God 
think of that? 

But Darwin hadn’t stopped talking. “Our voyage visited many islands, 
Your Majesty, a few of which had never received missionaries of any 
kind. Some of those tribes had serpentine analogues in their blood, while 
some did not. . . and each island was homogeneous. I hypothesize that 
the potential for analogues might have been distributed evenly through 
humankind millennia ago; but as populations grew isolated, geographi¬ 
cally or socially—■” 

“Yes, Mr. Darwin, We see your point.” Anne found she was tapping her 
finger on the edge of the table. She stopped herself and stood up. ‘This 
matter deserves further study. We shall instruct the police to find a place 
where you can continue your work without disturbance from outside 
sources.” 

Darwin’s face fell. “Would that be a jail, ma’am?” 

“A comfortable place of sanctuary,” she replied. “You will be supplied 
with anything you need—books, paper, all of that.” 

“Will I be able to publish?” he asked. 

“You will have at least one avid reader for whatever you write.” She fa- 

88 James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 

vored him with the slightest bow of her head. “You have given Us much 
to think about.” 

“Then let me give you one more thought, Your Majesty.” He took a deep 
breath, as if he was trying to decide if his next words would be offensive 
beyond the pale. Then, Anne supposed, he decided he had nothing to lose. 
“Papists and the Redeemed have been selectively breeding within their 
own populations for five hundred years. There may come a time when 
they are too far removed from each other to be . . . cross-fertile. Already 
there are rumors of an unusually high mortality rate for children with 
one Papist parent and one Redeemed. In time—millennia perhaps, but in 
time—I believe the two populations may split into separate species.” 

“Separate species? Of humans?” 

“It may happen, Your Majesty. At this very moment, we may be wit¬ 
nessing the origin of two new species.” 

Queen Anne pursed her lips in distaste. ‘The origin of species, Mr. Dar¬ 
win? If that is a joke, We are not amused.” 


3. The Efficacy of Trisulphozyymase for Preventing SA Incompatibility 
Reactions in Births of Mixed-Blood, Parentage: 

The hearing was held behind closed doors—a bad sign. Julia Grant had 
asked some of her colleagues what to expect and they all said, Show trial, 
Show trial. Senator McCarthy loved to get his name in the papers. And 
yet the reporters were locked out today; just Julia and the Committee. 

A very bad sign. 

“Good afternoon, Dr. Grant,” McCarthy said after she had sworn to tell 
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. His voice had a 
smarmy quality to it; an unpleasant man’s attempt at charm. “I suppose 
you know why you’re here?” 

“No, senator.” 

“Come now, doctor,” he chided, as if speaking to a five-year-old. “Sure¬ 
ly you must know the purpose of this Committee? And it therefore follows 
that we would take great interest in your work.” 

“My work is medical research,” she replied tightly. “I have no political 
interests at all.” She forced herself to stare McCarthy in the eye. “1 heal 
the sick.” 

‘There’s sickness and there’s sickness,” the senator shrugged. “We can 
all understand doctors who deal with sniffles and sneezes and heart at¬ 
tacks ... but that’s not your field, is it?” 

“No,” she answered. “I’m a hematologist, specializing in SA compatibil¬ 
ity problems.” 

“Could you explain that for the Committee?” 

The doctor suspected that every man on the Committee—and they 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 89 


February 1997 


were all men—had already been briefed on her research. If nothing else, 
they read the newspapers. Still, why not humor them? 

“All human blood,” she began, “is either SA-positive or SA-negative—” 

“SA stands for Serpentine Analogue?” McCarthy interrupted. 

“Yes. The name comes from the outdated belief—” 

“That some people have snakes in their bloodstream,” McCarthy inter¬ 
rupted again. 

‘That’s correct.” 

“Do some people have snakes in their bloodstream?” McCarthy asked. 

“Snake-like entities,” another senator corrected ... probably a Democrat. 

“Serpentine analogues are not present in anyone’s bloodstream,” Julia 
said. “They don’t appear until blood is exposed to air. It’s a specialized 
clotting mechanism, triggered by an enzyme that encourages microscop¬ 
ic threads to form at the site of an injury—” 

“In other words,” McCarthy said, “SA-positive blood works differently 
from SA-negative. Correct?” 

“In this one regard, yes,” Julia nodded. 

“Do you think SA-positive blood is better than SA-negative?” 

“It provides slightly more effective clotting at wounds—” 

“Do you admire SA-positive blood, doctor?” 

Julia stared at him. Mentally, she counted to ten. “I am fascinated by 
all types of blood,” she answered at last. “SA-positive clots faster . . . 
which is useful to stop bleeding but gives a slightly greater risk of stroke. 
Overall, I’d say the good points and the bad even out. If they didn’t, evo¬ 
lution would soon skew the population strongly one way or the other.” 

McCarthy folded his hands on the table in front of him. “So you believe 
in evolution, Dr. Grant?” 

“I’m a scientist. I also believe in gravity, thermodynamics, and the uni¬ 
versal gas equation.” 

Not a man on the Committee so much as smiled. 

“Doctor,” McCarthy said quietly, “what blood type are you?” 

She gritted her teeth. “The Supreme Court ruled that no one has to an¬ 
swer that question.” 

In sudden fury, McCarthy slammed his fist onto the table. “Do you see 
the Supreme Court in here with us? Do you? Because if you do, show me 
those black-robed faggots and I’ll boot their pope-loving asses straight out 
the window.” He settled back in his chair. “I don’t think you appreciate 
the seriousness of your situation, Dr. Grant.” 

“What situation?” she demanded. “I am a medical researcher—” 

“And you’ve developed a new drug, haven’t you?” McCarthy snapped. 
“A new drug. That you want to loose on the public. I wonder if the person 
who invented heroin called herself a medical researcher too?” 

“Mr. McCarthy, trisulphozymase is not a narcotic. It is a carefully de¬ 
veloped pharmaceutical—■” 

90 


James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 


“Which encourages miscegenation between Papists and the Re¬ 
deemed,” McCarthy finished. “That’s what it does, doesn’t it, doctor?” 

“No!” She took a deep breath. “Trisulphozymase combats certain med¬ 
ical problems that occur when an SA-positive father and an SA-negative 
mother—” 

“When a Papist man sires his filthy whelp on a Redeemed woman,” 
McCarthy interrupted. “When a Papist fucks one of the Saved! That’s 
what you want to encourage, doctor? That’s how you’ll make the world a 
better place?” 

Julia said nothing. She felt her cheeks burn like a child caught in some 
forbidden act; and she was infuriated that her reaction was guilt rather 
than outrage at what McCarthy was saying. 

Yes, she wanted to say, it will make the world a better place to stop sep¬ 
arating humanity into hostile camps. Most people on the planet had no 
comprehension of either Papist or Redeemed theology; but somehow, the 
poisonous idea of blood discrimination had spread to every country of the 
globe, regardless of religious faith. Insanity! And millions recognized it to 
be so. Yet the McCarthys of the world found it a convenient ladder on 
which they could climb to power, and who was stopping them? Look at 
Germany. Look at Ireland. Look at India and Pakistan. 

Ridiculous .. . and deadly, time and again throughout history. Perhaps 
she should set aside SA compatibility and work on a cure for the drive to 
demonize those who were different. 

“A doctor deals with lives, not lifestyles,” she said stiffly. “If I were con¬ 
fronted with a patient whose heart had stopped beating, I would attempt 
to start it again, whether the victim were an innocent child, a convicted 
murderer, or even a senator.” She leaned forward. “Has anyone here ever 
seen an SA incompatibility reaction? How a newborn infant dies? How 
the mother goes into spasm and usually dies too? Real people, gentlemen; 
real screams of pain! Only a monster could witness such things and still 
rant about ideology.” 

A few Committee members had the grace to look uncomfortable, turn¬ 
ing away from her gaze; but McCarthy was not one of them. “You think 
this is all just ideology, doctor? A lofty discussion of philosophical doc¬ 
trine?” He shook his head in unconvincing sorrow. “I wish it were ... I 
truly wish it were. I wish the Papists weren’t trying to rip down every¬ 
thing this country stands for, obeying the orders of their foreign masters 
to corrupt the spirit of liberty itself. Why should I care about a screaming 
woman, when she’s whored herself to the likes of them? She made her de¬ 
cision; now she has to face the consequences. No one in this room invent¬ 
ed SA incompatibility, doctor. God did ... and I think we should take the 
hint, don’t you?” 

The sharp catch of bile rose in Julia’s throat. For a moment, she couldn’t 
find the strength to fight it; but she couldn’t be sick, not in front of these 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


91 


February 1997 



men. Swallowing hard, she forced herself to breathe evenly until the mo¬ 
ment passed. “Senators,” she said at last, “do you actually intend to sup¬ 
press trisulphozymase? To withhold life-saving treatment from those 
who need it?” 

“Some might say it’s a sign,” McCarthy answered, “that a Redeemed 
man can father a child on a Papist without complications, but it doesn’t 
work the other way around. Doesn’t that sound like a sign to you?” 

“Senators,” she said, ignoring McCarthy, “does this Committee intend 
to suppress trisulphozymase?” 

Silence. Then McCarthy gave a little smile. “How does trisulphozy¬ 
mase work, doctor?” 

Julia stared at him, wondering where this new question was going. 
Warily, she replied, “The drug dismantles the SA factor enzyme into ba- 


92 


James Alan Gardner 



Asimov's 


sic amino acids. This prevents a more dangerous response from the moth¬ 
er’s immune system, which might otherwise produce antibodies to the en¬ 
zyme. The antibodies are the real problem, because they may attack the 
baby’s—” 

“So what you’re saying,” McCarthy interrupted, “is that this drug can 
destroy the snakes in a Papist’s bloodstream?” 

“I told you, there are no snakes! Trisulphozymase temporarily elimi¬ 
nates the extra clotting enzyme that comes from SA-positive blood.” 

“It’s only temporary?” 

“That’s all that’s needed. One injection shortly before the moment of 
birth—” 

“But what about repeated doses?” McCarthy interrupted. “Or a mas¬ 
sive dose? Could you permanently wipe out the SA factor in a person’s 
blood?” 

“You don’t administer trisulphozymase to an SA-positive person,” Ju¬ 
lia said. “It’s given to an SA-negative mother to prevent—■” 

“But suppose you did give it to a Papist. A big dose. Lots of doses. 
Could it destroy the SA factor forever?” He leaned forward eagerly. 
“Could it make them like us?’’ 

And now Julia saw it: what this hearing was all about. Because the 
Committee couldn’t really suppress the treatment, could they? Her re¬ 
sults were known in the research community. Even if the drug were 
banned here, other countries would use it; and there would eventually be 
enough public pressure to force re-evaluation. This wasn’t about the lives 
of babies and mothers; this was about clipping the devil’s horns. 

Keeping her voice steady, she said, “It would be unconscionable to ad¬ 
minister this drug or any other to a person whose health did not require 
it. Large doses or long-term use of trisulphozymase would have side ef¬ 
fects I could not venture to guess.” The faces in front of her showed no ex¬ 
pression. “Gentlemen,” she tried again, “in an SA-positive person, the en¬ 
zyme is natural. A natural component of blood. To interfere with a body’s 
natural functioning when there is no medical justification ...” she threw 
up her hands. “Do no harm, gentlemen. The heart of the Hippocratic 
Oath. At the very least, doctors must do no harm.” 

“Does that mean,” McCarthy asked, “that you would refuse to head a 
research project into this matter?” 

“Me?” 

“You’re the top expert in your field,” McCarthy shrugged. “If anybody 
can get rid of the snakes once and for all, it’s you.” 

“Senator,” Julia said, “have you no shame? Have you no shame at all? 
You want to endanger lives over this .. . triviality? A meaningless differ¬ 
ence you can only detect with a microscope—” 

“Which means they can walk among us, doctor! Papists can walk 
among us. Them with their special blood, their snakes, their damned in- 

Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


93 


February 1997 


breeding—they’re the ones who care about what you call a triviality! 
They’re the ones who flaunt it in our faces. They say they’re God’s Cho¬ 
sen. With God’s Mark of Blessing. Well, I intend to erase that mark, with 
or without your help.” 

“Without,” Julia told him. “Definitely without.” 

McCarthy’s gaze was on her. He did not look like a man who had just 
received an absolute no. With an expression far too smug, he said, “Let 
me tell you a secret, doctor. From our agents in the enemy camp. Even as 
we speak, the Papists are planning to contaminate our water supply with 
their damned SA enzyme. Poison us or make us like them .. . one way or 
the other. We need your drug to fight that pollution; to remove the en¬ 
zyme from our blood before it can destroy us! What about that, Dr. 
Grant? Will your precious medical ethics let you work on a treatment to 
keep us safe from their damned Papist toxins?” 

Julia grimaced. “You know nothing about the human metabolism. Peo¬ 
ple couldn’t ‘catch’ the SA factor from drinking water; the enzyme would 
just break down in your stomach acid. I suppose it might be possible to 
produce a methylated version that would eventually work its way into 
the bloodstream. . . .” She stopped herself. “Anyway, I can’t believe the 
Papists would be so insane as to—■” 

“Right now,” McCarthy interrupted, “sitting in a committee room of 
some Papist hideaway, there are a group of men who are just as crazy as 
we are. Believe that, doctor. Whatever we are willing to do to them, they 
are willing to do to us; the only question is, who’ll do it first.” McCarthy 
settled back and cradled his hands on his stomach. “Snakes all ’round, 
Dr. Grant. You can make a difference in who gets bitten.” 

It was, perhaps, the only true thing McCarthy had said since the hear¬ 
ing had begun. Julia tried to doubt it, but couldn’t. SA-positive or nega¬ 
tive, you could still be a ruthless bastard. 

She said nothing. 

McCarthy stared at her a few moments more, then glanced at the men 
on both sides of him. “Let’s consider this hearing adjourned, all right? 
Give Dr. Grant a little time to think this over.” He turned to look straight 
at her. “A little time. We’ll contact you in a few days . . . find out who 
scares you more, us or them.” 

He had the nerve to wink before he turned away. 

The other senators filed from the room, almost bumping into each oth¬ 
er in the hurry to leave. Complicitous men . . . weak men, for all their 
power. Julia remained in the uncomfortable “Witness Chair,” giving 
them ample time to scurry away; she didn’t want to lay eyes on them 
again when she finally went out into the corridor. 

Using trisulphozymase on an SA-positive person ... what would be the 
effect? Predictions were almost worthless in biochemistry—medical sci¬ 
ence was a vast ocean of ignorance dotted with researchers trying to stay 


94 


James Alan Gardner 


Asimov's 

afloat in makeshift canoes. The only prediction you could safely make 
was that a large enough dose of any drug would kill the patient. 

On the other hand, better to inject trisulphozymase into SA-positive 
people than SA-negative. The chemical reactions that broke down the SA 
enzyme also broke down the trisulphozymase—mutual assured destruc¬ 
tion. If you didn’t have the SA enzyme in your blood, the trisulphozymase 
would build up to lethal levels much faster, simply because there was 
nothing to stop it. SA-positive people could certainly tolerate dosages that 
would kill a ... 

Julia felt a chill wash through her. She had created a drug that would 
poison SA-negatives but not SA-positives . .. that could selectively mas¬ 
sacre the Redeemed while leaving the Papists standing. And her re¬ 
search was a matter of public record. How long would it take before some¬ 
one on the Papist side made the connection? One of those men McCarthy 
had talked about, just as ruthless and crazy as the senator himself. 

How long would it take before they used her drug to slaughter half the 
world? 

There was only one way out: put all the snakes to sleep. If Julia could 
somehow wave her hands and make every SA-positive person SA-nega- 
tive, then the playing field would be level again. No, not the playing 
field—the killing field. 

Insanity ... but what choice did she have? Sign up with McCarthy; get 
rid of the snakes before they began to bite; pray the side effects could be 
treated. Perhaps, if saner minds prevailed, the process would never be 
deployed. Perhaps the threat would be enough to force some kind of bi¬ 
lateral enzyme disarmament. 

Feeling twenty years older. Dr. Julia Grant left the hearing room. The 
corridor was empty; through the great glass entryway at the front of the 
building, she could see late afternoon sunlight slanting across the mar¬ 
ble steps. A single protester stood on the sidewalk, mutely holding a sign 
aloft—no doubt what McCarthy would call a Papist sympathizer, traitor¬ 
ously opposing a duly appointed congressional committee. 

The protester’s sign read, “Why do you concern yourself with the sleep¬ 
ing creature before you, when you are blind to the serpents in your own 
heart?" 

Julia turned away, hoping the building had a back door. • 


Asimov's Science Fiction is published monthly (eleven issues, one being o double) by 
Dell Magazines, a division of Crosstown Publications, 1270 Avenue of the Americas, 
New York, NY 10020; shareholders owning 1 percent or more are Penny Press Inc., 
Selma, William, Andrew, John, James, and Peter Kanter, 6 Prowitt St., Norwalk, CT 
06855-1220. There are no mortgages or other security holders. Total average copies 
printed: 60,939; 45,909 total paid circulation. 


Three Hearings on the Existence of Snakes in the Human Bloodstream 


95 





* Uncle River tells us he "suspects tha? sanity requires more of peace and 
Aw^tt^y^tojpeew’rently is available on this planet. Once trained in Jungian 
Analysis, I now live as fat out of the way as possible for what perspec¬ 
tive I can find." While the author has a regular column in Britain'seack 
Brain Recluse, and has written and published in small presses for many 
years, he considers ''Passing the Torch" to be his first major sale. 


mm 


Illustration by Mike Aspengron 



February 1997 

ff\ ’m sorry, all the plumbers are in jail.” The woman’s voice on the 
I other end of the phone sounded angry. Then she cut the connec- 
I tion. 

I Esther Pernion stared at the dead phone, confused. I’m too tired 
for this, she thought. 

Esther felt weak as she walked the few steps to her threadbare, royal 
blue-and-grey easy chair. At least her legs worked all right, and her arms 
as she lowered herself into the seat. She sat a few moments, reassem¬ 
bling her thoughts. 

She had had another “spell” this morning. Let’s not kid ourselves, she 
thought, another stroke. The sudden headache, the weakness, the confu¬ 
sion—Esther knew the symptoms. Well, that sort of thing happens. At 
seventy-two, she’d had one that slurred her voice and caused her to limp 
for six months. She didn’t think her speech was slurred this time. They’d 
wanted to put her in an “old people’s prison,” as she put it, back then. 
Now, at eighty-two she still lived alone. 

“But Mom,” Jennifer’d said just last month, “I worry about you. Some¬ 
thing could happen." 

“You mean I could die with no one around to poke a needle in my ass,” 
Esther retorted. 

“Now, Mom ....” 

“You’re just afraid I’ll fall down and the county blade driver will find 
me two weeks later in a puddle of piss, and you’ll be publicly embar¬ 
rassed.” 

Jennifer left angry. Esther felt a little guilty later, but her life was her 
life. 

So now what? Esther wasn’t sure how long she had been sitting, mus¬ 
ing. Had she dozed off a bit? 

Let me see, Esther thought: I had another stroke this morning. It was 
when I couldn’t find the jar opener and tried to open the olives by hand. 
So I took a couple Tylenol and noticed the puddle. That’s it, that’s what I 
was calling for; I wanted a plumber. 

The headache was gone. The Tylenol must have worked. Esther still 
was unsure how much time had passed. She felt thirsty. She decided to 
brew some tea. Jennifer had given her one of those new temperature-sen¬ 
sitive microwaves, but Esther kept it unplugged and stored dried fruit in 
it. 

“Mom, why are you so anti-technology?” Jennifer had asked. 

“I like technology just fine,” Esther had snapped back. She didn’t mean 
to snap, but she knew she did. “I just don’t need a lot of gadgets cluttering 
up my life.” 

Jennifer’s feelings were hurt, but Esther still wouldn’t use the mi¬ 
crowave. She did like her propane stove. She filled the tea kettle, careful 
not to run much water down the apparently faulty drain, then set it on 


98 


Unde River 


Asimov's 


the left front burner. She was almost back to her easy chair when she re¬ 
alized she had forgotten to turn on the stove. Damn, she thought, strokes 
are so tiring. The few steps back to the stove were an effort. 

Esther poured dry mullein, rose hips, and a little mint into her round, 
brown-glazed tea pot. She considered having coffee instead to perk her 
up, but decided, what with the stroke, that that wasn’t such a good idea. 
She had already drunk two cups of coffee that morning. A doctor would, 
no doubt, tell her to quit entirely. Well, she’d never expected to live to be 
eighty-two. As long as she was still alive, she might as well enjoy it. Tea 
was pleasant too, though. 

Esther set her cup and saucer on the faded oak table by her chair, 
along with the honey and a spoon. She sat down again, waiting for the 
water to boil, enjoying the view out her kitchen window. Bare trees 
curved angular against a bright blue sky: alder, walnut, larger cotton¬ 
woods. Pinons, junipers, and live oaks stood somber green on grey and 
buff bluffs. Perhaps she would go outside. The breeze carrying the last 
wisps of cloud from yesterday’s rain off to the northeast might be chilly, 
but the November sun was shining so brilliantly that she was sure it 
would be comfortable in the lee of the house. A bug, immobilized all 
morning by last night’s cold, now crawled around the outside of the 
south-window screen. 

While the tea steeped, Esther suddenly recalled that she had intended 
to call a plumber, and decided to try again. She picked up the receiver 
and held it to her ear. She felt sufficiently disoriented that it was several 
seconds before she realized that there was no dial tone. She set the re¬ 
ceiver down and checked to be sure the wire wasn’t loose. It was tight. 
She tried the phone again. It was quite dead. 

This is becoming a decidedly odd day, Esther thought. She considered 
becoming alarmed, but felt that would bring back her headache. So she 
sat back down in her chair and poured a cup of tea through the strainer 
instead. Then she opened the little drawer in the front of the side table 
and got out her small green stone pipe and the small round tin of mari¬ 
juana. She filled the pipe, then lit it with her new glo-lite. Despite deni¬ 
grating gadgets to Jennifer, Esther had no objection to something that 
did the job better. She had yet to use up a glo-lite, though she had lost 
two. 

If anyone had asked, Esther would have said that the marijuana was a 
vaso-dilator and blood-pressure regulator and was thus medically appro¬ 
priate following her stroke. She had never consulted a doctor on the mat¬ 
ter. She considered it medicine for the soul regardless. She inhaled 
smoke, touched the pipe to her forehead, raised it aloft, then inhaled 
again. She set the pipe down, stirred honey into her tea, sipped, and con¬ 
templated. 

Outside, the breeze occasionally gusted to a proper wind. Might be 

Passing the Torch 99 


February 1997 


some weather coming, Esther thought, forgetting about yesterday’s that 
was leaving. She could feel the spirits riding the wind. 

Like her tea and honey, marijuana smoke, juniper smoke in the wood 
stove, the spirits each had a flavor, mostly familiar. Nature spirits 
danced, slumbered, or roared, crisp or pungent, not especially human, 
but nourishing in their vitality. There were others too: kind but prickly 
ones, the busy spirits that fondled and worried so many lives, the nasty 
ones whose food was suffering itself. 

Something felt different, today, though, Esther thought, sipping her 
tea while the marijuana caressed her sore brain. In all these years, the 
thing she still found a mystery was how to tell what is subjective and 
what objective. Only by comparing inner perspective to outer event had 
Esther ever been able to locate experience. So, she mused, is all this ac¬ 
tivity happening because I’m going to die today? Is that it? Did the world 
shut down on me today because I’m getting ready to leave this old body? 
Or does it have some purpose of its own to which I am participant... or 
observer ... or totally incidental? Nearby spirits felt stronger. Bigger, 
more distant spirits felt scattered. Now what could that mean? 

Esther set her teacup down and dozed. She had been sleepy after pre¬ 
vious strokes too. 

A hurried knock at the door woke Esther. The sun shone right on her, 
which meant it must be about to set. Esther’s brain and mouth both felt 
blurry. A sip of cold tea tasted much better than cold coffee would have. 
“Coming,” she called. 

Esther remembered to stand slowly. She still felt a little dizzy, but her 
coordination seemed normal as she walked to the door, straightening her 
soft, blue, shapeless sweat shirt as she went. She brushed a wisp of white 
hair off her right ear, then opened the door. Her veiny hand felt a little 
weak, but it gripped normally. She hoped her voice was clear. 

Esther’s neighbor, Prabaht, stood at the door. Esther always meant to 
ask him about his name. It sounded Indian to her, though his brown hair 
and fair, if tanned, features looked North European. Prabaht wore faded 
jeans and an old black T-shirt in the cool, late afternoon breeze. Fortyish, 
medium height and bone-skinny, Esther always figured his blood circu¬ 
lated double-time to keep him warm. Perpetually active, Prabaht never 
accomplished much, as he never slowed down enough to organize his ac¬ 
tions. Esther saw no sign of Prabaht’s truck. He must have walked the 
third of a mile. 

“Come on in. Have a seat.” 

Prabaht burst through the door but didn’t sit. “Have you heard?” 

Prabaht’s hovering and pacing had once irritated Esther. Now she just 
sat down herself. “I’m a little tired today. Make yourself coffee. Heard 
what?” 

‘The shit hit the fan this morning.” Prabaht set the kettle on the stove 

100 Untie River 



Asimov's 


to boil and put a paper towel in the funnel for a filter over the glass coffee 
pot. 

Esther thought of her misbehaving drain—and brain. “Things have 
been a little off,” she said. 

‘They didn’t come here, did they?” Prabaht stared, intense. 

“You’re the only person who’s come here all day. What’s happened?” 

‘They started rounding up everyone with a drug record. Then things 
got crazy.” Prabaht scooped coffee into the ersatz filter and fussed impa¬ 
tiently at the kettle. 

“I should think!” Esther replied. “Numbers alone . ..” 

But then she did think. Subjective and objective: Everyone mixes them. 
It can’t be helped. Prabaht always jumped to conclusions, nearly always 
wrong. Something had happened, no doubt, but Prabaht’s projections al¬ 
most certainly misinterpreted events. 

Prabaht paced, drank coffee, and ranted about the government and the 
Jesuits. Esther filled her pipe again and lit it. Prabaht glanced, some¬ 
what wild-eyed, out the window, then smoked with her. Esther knew it 
made him uncomfortable that she just set the pipe on the table when it 
was empty, but she refused to acquiesce to his paranoia by hiding it. 

“I’ve seen the maps, you know,” Prabaht said, over his second cup of 
coffee. 

“I’m hungry,” said Esther. “Will you join me for dinner?” 

“Can’t stay,” said Prabaht, “but you go ahead.” 

Esther did. She spooned cooked beans into a pan with a little bacon 
grease and set it on the stove to heat, got out a jar of salsa—she still put 
up a full year’s worth—and warmed a flour tortilla. Sometimes she 
would fix a plate for Prabaht even if he said no. He would usually eat it. 
This evening, she didn’t bother. If he consumed nothing but coffee until 
he starved, that was his problem. 

“They’ve had streets laid out for a concentration camp right up at 
Longhorn Gap for years!” Prabaht’s voice faded into a meaningless hum. 
What Esther enjoyed about him, she thought, was the way his knees and 
elbows flapped about as he paced and jabbered, like a hyperactive heron. 

Esther grated a bit of longhorn cheese, carefully scooped the beans onto 
the tortilla with the cheese and salsa, folded the tortilla, then ate her 
supper with a knife and fork, while Prabaht’s voice played on in rhythm 
with his body. 

Breeze stilled. Sun set. A moon, more than half full, illuminated the 
peaceful yard. Esther could hear Walnut Creek, fifty feet from the house, 
behind gaps in Prabaht’s monologue. 

Prabaht paused, stood stock still for the first time since entering. Es¬ 
ther knew this signal, and focused in on him as he said, “Well, got to go. 
I’ll stop by tomorrow, they don’t haul me off first. Need anything?” 

“I could use a little wood split,” said Esther, “if you have time.” 


Passing the Torch 


101 


February 1997 


“Sure.” Prabaht flicked on the yard light and strode out the door. 

The house still held the sunny afternoon’s warmth, but Esther built a 
fire for evening. She knew she would be sleepy again soon. She heard the 
quick axe strokes in the yard as she washed her dish, spoon, knife, fork, 
and grater while the fire caught. 

Prabaht carried in the full kindling box, followed by four armloads of 
aromatic juniper and solid oak. Esther held out two dollar bills. 

“That’s all right,” Prabaht raised a hand. 

“No, you take it,” said Esther. 

It was a ritual repeated many times in the two and a half years that 
Prabaht had been Esther’s closest neighbor. Esther’s social security was 
a meager income, but consistent, and she owned her house outright. Er¬ 
ratically employed and poorly organized, Prabaht was in constant danger 
of losing his home for failure to pay the ninety-dollar-a-month rent. 

Prabaht stuffed the two dollars in bis pants pocket, reheated the last 
of the coffee, and drained the pot. “Well, got to go,” he said as he plunked 
his cup down. 

“Good to see you,” said Esther, as Prabaht stalked out in his T-shirt 
through the chilly moonlit evening. 

Esther set an oak log on the fire—quite as substantial as she cared to 
lift—adjusted the damper, rinsed out the coffee pot and Prabaht’s cup, as 
well as her own tea cup, and then decided she might as well go to bed. 
Best thing for a stroke is a good night’s sleep, she thought. Then it oc¬ 
curred to her: Oh damn! I didn’t think to ask Prabaht to look at that 
drain. 

Esther looked for the puddle. It seemed smaller, rather than larger, 
even after she had washed the few dishes. Oh, well, perhaps things 
would make better sense tomorrow. 

In the morning, Esther felt better, but decided perhaps she should only 
have one cup of coffee. She added a dollop of half-and-half; it was almost 
gone. 

Esther sat in her chair and contemplated the way the sun sparkled on 
the morning’s frost. She had intended to drive to town today to pick up 
the mail and a few groceries—before she was reduced to using that 
hideous powdered creamer in the coffee. The four-and-a-half mile trip 
once a week kept the faded red Valiant that had looked new fourteen 
years ago when she’d bought it (though, of course, it wasn’t) adequately 
lubricated. The only major work she had ever had to do on it was to have 
the wheel wells modified to accomodate taller wheels, so that she would 
have the clearance she needed crossing the creek. 

But maybe she should wait a day. Perhaps she should give Stella at the 
post office a call. Better to say she would be in in a day or so than to have 
someone nosing around suspecting her of being unable to take care of 
herself. 


102 


Uncle River 


Asimov's 


Esther put on her glasses and read a bit in an historical novel from the 
State Library Books by Mail—a wonderful program for rural people. 
Then she made herself a boiled egg and a slice of toast, and did have an¬ 
other third of a cup of coffee. At eight thirty-five, she tried calling the post 
office. Her phone was still dead. 

Many people Esther’s age spent their lives in front of a television. Till 
the advent of cable, which did not extend far enough out of town to reach 
Esther, and the satellite dish, reception was inadequate to make televi¬ 
sion worth the bother at Esther’s house. Visitors were appalled. Jennifer 
wanted to help Esther buy a satellite dish. 

“If I wanted all that racket, I’d have moved to some noisy hell hole like 
Phoenix long ago.” 

Jennifer brought the subject up every six months. Esther always said 
no. In her urgency to defend her independence, she usually managed to 
say it in a way she later felt guilty for. Oh well, Esther thought, if a 
daughter hasn’t gotten used to you after sixty years, what’s to be done? 

Despite not wanting a television, there were occasions when Esther 
would have likod some news. She did have a radio, two in fact. One was 
part of her tape player. The other had been a bonus with a magazine sub¬ 
scription. Neither currently worked. Due to distance and mountains, re¬ 
ception was abysmal even if they had. Only the Navajo station out of 
Window Rock came in clearly, and, of course, most of the news on it was 
in Navajo. 

Esther put on her brown wool jacket, and a brown wool hat with or¬ 
ange decorations she had knitted since last winter and only first worn 
the past couple of weeks, and went outside. The thermometer, shaded by 
the overhang of the roof, read twenty-seven degrees, but bright sun had 
already melted the frost off the car. Birds chirped in the clear, still morn¬ 
ing. The sun felt warm and invigorating. 

Esther walked to the car and raised the hood, careful not to exert her¬ 
self too suddenly: Don’t want to pop another blood vessel, she thought. 
The sun shone full on the battery. If the phone still didn’t work in an hour, 
she thought she would drive in and see what was going on. Little backwa¬ 
ters on the creek held a thin skim of ice, crystal patterns radiating artful¬ 
ly. A fat ground squirrel scooted past. Esther walked thirty or forty yards 
along the bank of the creek. Then she heard a scrabbling sound. 

Esther looked among the winter-bare brush. Why, there were the 
chickens! She hadn’t seen them in days. Descended from fighting stock, 
they looked like banties. She had originally gotten them to keep the scor¬ 
pions down. Skunks, coyotes, and who knows what-all had done in every 
attempt Esther had made to keep a penned laying flock. These, loose and 
wild, managed to survive and perpetuate themselves. She wondered if 
she were just sleeping too soundly to notice, or if they were roosting so far 
off that she wasn’t hearing the roosters. 

Passing the Torch 103 


February 1997 

Esther got half a coffee can of cracked corn from the shed and tossed it 
about. The chickens scrambled for it. There were at least twenty, includ¬ 
ing six roosters and two chicks she didn’t recall seeing before, only now 
feathered out; their mother must have hidden them in the woods while 
they were smaller. One of the roosters crowed, ruffling his rich red neck 
and iridescent green tail feathers. 

Thanksgiving’s coming up, Esther thought. I’ll invite Prabaht and have 
him catch us a young rooster. Even a young rooster would have to be 
boiled all day before she roasted it, or it would be too tough to eat, but the 
flavor was the best. The things one doesn’t expect, Esther thought, like 
still having my own teeth at eighty-two! 

Depending on the direction of the wind, Esther could sometimes hear 
vehicles on the two-lane highway a mile away down the canyon, some¬ 
times not. A logging truck slowing for the curve just south of the turnoff 
was the sound she heard most regularly. She hadn’t noticed any this 
morning. She looked down the canyon now at the sound of something ap¬ 
proaching. A tangy whiff of juniper smoke from her stovepipe wafted by 
as a modest-sized but snappy motorcycle pulled into view. 

The rider was almost to the house before Esther recognized her six- 
teen-year-old great-grandson, Peter. Peter’s mother, Esther’s grand¬ 
daughter Sylvia, was, last Esther knew, in the midst of yet another cata¬ 
strophic relationship. Peter lived with his grandmother, Jennifer, in 
Socorro—a hundred and fifty miles away. Esther felt sorry for Peter, 
having to be a boy with an unmarried mother, unknown father, and a di¬ 
vorced grandmother and great-grandmother. Still, that was no excuse to 
cut school. 

Peter rounded the final curve. Then, instead of slowing down to ford 
the creek, he sped up, and roared across in a cloud of spray. Esther shook 
her head and smiled. Peter parked his bike by Esther’s car and hopped 
off. “Car broke?” he asked. 

“I’m just letting the sun warm the battery.” Esther gave Peter a big 
hug. “Isn’t it a school day?” 

“I tried to call; the phones are out.” 

“Oh. I thought it was just mine.” 

“Ma Jen figured I better get here while I could.” 

Esther recalled Prabaht’s ranting. She had not felt up to paying much 
attention. A lot of Prabaht’s talk was paranoid fantasy anyhow. 

“Bring your things in the house,” Esther said. “Then explain. Have you 
had breakfast?” 

“Nope.” Peter grinned and jumped to unsnap the bungies holding the 
pack on the back of his bike. Whatever was happening, Esther could see 
that the teenager considered it a great adventure. 

Peter followed Esther into the house. The refrigerator was humming. 

“Wow!” Peter said, “you’ve got electricity!” 


104 


Unde River 


Asimov's 


“Of course,” said Esther. 

“It’s out in town.” 

“Oh?” This was far from the first time Esther had been blissfully un¬ 
aware of a power outage. Between photovoltaics and the little hydro sys¬ 
tem on the creek, she had more electricity than she knew what to do 
with. She had heard computers on such a home system had difficulty 
with voltage irregularities, but none of the few appliances Esther ran 
seemed to mind. 

“Damn, it’s a good thing I got here,” Peter said. 

Esther felt a flash of irritation. Her daughter wasn’t trying to run her 
life again, was she? She also noticed Peter’s use of profanity. Well, so long 
as he didn’t become really foul-mouthed, she could hardly object. She said 
more than an occasional “damn” herself. Still, it was disconcerting hav¬ 
ing a great grandson a head taller than oneself. “What do you mean?” Es¬ 
ther asked, keeping her voice neutral. “Bacon and eggs sound good?” 

“Sounds great. You really haven’t heard? The shit hit the fan!” 

‘That’s what Prabaht said, but...” Esther did not want the boy to know 
why she had no idea what else her neighbor may have told her. “. . . I 
haven’t heard the details yet.” 

Peter didn’t notice his great grandmother’s evasion. He told her what 
he knew, which was not altogether clear: Someone had ordered surprise 
mass arrests yesterday, before dawn. Only, of course, that didn’t work. 
Lots of cops warned their families and friends. Information leaked to ra¬ 
dio and television stations. Some officials balked. Police records did seem 
to affect who got raided. If drug-related police records had any special 
part in it, as Prabaht had said, Peter didn’t mention it. Thousands of peo¬ 
ple were taken by surprise, but what started as a mass police raid degen¬ 
erated, within hours, into mass chaos. 

Peter had set out about one yesterday afternoon. His grandmother 
reasoned that his petty infractions, all still juvenile, might not be listed 
beyond the county. Esther had her doubts about this reasoning, but she 
didn’t say anything. It had taken Peter twenty hours to come one hun¬ 
dred and fifty miles. He had evaded four roadblocks, half a dozen places 
where he heard gunfire, though he didn’t know what any of them were 
about, and stolen a gallon of gasoline. Normally, his great-grandmother 
would object strenuously to this last, but under the circumstances.... He 
had not eaten since yesterday morning 

So far as Esther could tell, Peter was having the time of his life. 

Esther had started to fry Peter three slices of bacon. She doubled that 
and got out a third egg. He ate four slices of toast while the bacon and 
eggs cooked. 

“Um, do you have coffee?” Peter asked. 

“When did you start drinking coffee?” Esther snapped back. 

Peter mumbled something unintelligible. 

Passing the Torch 105 


February 1997 


All unbidden, an image flew into Esther’s mind of herself at fourteen, 
smoking a cigarette in her room by an open window. She’d heard her 
mother’s step on the stairs. Out the window went the cigarette, where it 
landed on the awning of the window below. Thank heavens a neighbor 
noticed the fire before the whole house went up! After that, her mother 
told her that if she was going to do anything so disgusting as smoke, she 
might as well do it in the open where at least she wouldn’t burn the 
house down. She did, too; she didn’t quit till she was sixty-one and near¬ 
ly died of pneumonia for the third time. 

Esther set the kettle on the stove, rinsed the glass coffee pot, and 
scooped coffee into a fresh paper towel in the funnel. 

After he was done eating. Peter washed the dishes, which Esther 
thought extraordinarily considerate. As he dried his hands, he smiled 
and asked, “Got any smoke?” 

Peter had been smoking pot, that Esther knew of, since he was eight. 
She still wasn’t sure if she approved, but she was sure there was less 
harm to it than alcohol or cigarettes. “Oh, yes.” 

“Let’s boke a smole.” 

The little green stone pipe still sat on the table by Esther’s chair. She 
never had put it away last night. “In the drawer,” she said. 

Peter got out the tin of mixed leaf and bud and filled the pipe. ‘This all 
you’ve got?” 

“There’s more.” 

There are a few compensations to being eighty-two, Esther thought. 
One was that you could embarrass busybody authorities. Every year, 
small armies of cops descended on the area, usually in September, 
thrashing about in the woods in camouflage uniforms, purporting to 
search for marijuana crops. Every year, there were horror stories, mostly 
of completely innocent citizens being terrorized in their own homes. 
Every year, a few dozen pot plants were discovered and triumphantly 
displayed to the press—as if this somehow justified helicopters buzzing 
homes, roadblocks, and God only knew how much expenditure of tax 
money. 

Afterward, the County and State would invariably spend more defend¬ 
ing themselves from lawsuits than they realized in fines. Prabaht always 
claimed that creating employment for lawyers was the primary purpose 
of the whole affair. “No one grows a commercial crop around here any¬ 
how. It’s too hard to hide. There’s not enough places with that much nat¬ 
ural water.” 

Whatever the reason, Esther kept her eyes open, since she really did 
grow herself a small pot crop. On two occasions in the last five years, she 
caught investigators snooping around. Once, the man was a stranger, 
alone. She ranted at him about property rights and fences. The other 
time, it was a local deputy she had known all his life. Esther threatened 


106 


Uncle River 


Asimov's 

to shoot his balls off. She was certain her white hair greatly improved the 
effectiveness of this strategy. 

Peter lit the pipe and passed it to Esther. She sat down in her chair, 
raised the pipe in dedication, and smoked. Peter squatted next to her. 

Just a moment after they were done, the chickens started squawking. 
Peter jumped to the window. “I think there’s someone out there,” he said. 

Esther stood slowly and joined Peter at the window. A furtive figure 
dashed from a clump of live oak to a clump of juniper. Esther realized, as 
she stood beside her great-grandson, that Jennifer had sent him to her 
not for her protection but for his. This realization improved both Esther’s 
feeling for her daughter and her self-confidence. 

Esther smoothed the maroon sweat shirt she was wearing today and 
walked across the room. She cleared her throat and opened the door. 
“Hey, Prabaht!” she called. 

“Everything all right?” Prabaht called back from behind his juniper. 

“Of course. Come on down.” 

Prabaht wore olive-green pants and an emerald-green long-sleeved 
shirt, his idea of camouflage, not altogether relevant amid the sparse 
vegetation of the largely autumn-brown hillside. He had smudged char¬ 
coal on his face, wore a handgun at his side in a holster originally made 
for a larger model, and had a twelve-gauge shotgun slung over his shoul¬ 
der by a dirty piece of rope. He looked with blatant suspicion at the mo¬ 
torcycle. 

“You know Peter,” Esther said. 

Prabaht’s smudged face registered confusion. 

“My great-grandson,” Esther added. “He’s here . . . hiding out.” 

It was the last comment that finally made sense to Prabaht. “Ah!” 
Prabaht had spent the whole morning sneaking around the hills. Since 
he hadn’t spoken to anyone, he had no idea what was going on. 

“More or less normal in town,” said Peter, “except not a lot was open, 
and the electric was out.” 

“Hmmm,” said Prabaht portentiously. 

Tellez, population four hundred, including outlying homes such as Es¬ 
ther’s, was the county seat, and the biggest community in eighty miles. 
Somewhere else, a town so small might be lucky to have a variety store. 
Due to distance, Tellez supported, if marginally, a variety of business¬ 
es, from an auto parts/chain saw repair shop to something that called it¬ 
self a boutique (known locally as The House of Bad Taste), lodged in a 
rat-infested trailer that would have been condemned by the Health De¬ 
partment someplace with enough population to have a Health Depart¬ 
ment. 

“I need to take a little rest,” said Esther. “While you’re figuring out 
what’s happened to the world, see if you can find where the chickens are 
roosting.” 

Passing the Torch 107 


February 1997 

Esther lay down and slept for an hour. When she woke, she could hear 
Prabaht and Peter talking quietly outside, and could smell coffee. A shad¬ 
ow called her attention to the sky. A few little clouds were coming in from 
the northwest. 

Esther patted her hair and sweat shirt into shape, then set a fresh pot 
of beans to soak. She jumped when the phone rang. She heard Peter 
laugh, and glanced out the window. The phone had so startled Prabaht 
that he had fallen on his face. Esther wondered how much coffee he had 
drunk—and whether he had eaten anything. 

The phone didn’t ring a second time, but Esther picked it up. Nothing. 
She hung it up and stood a few seconds, then started back across the 
room. The phone tinked once as if it was trying to ring. Esther picked it 
up again. This time there was a dial tone. 

Peter stuck his head in the door. 

“I believe the phone’s fixed,” Esther said. “Maybe we should let your 
grandmother know you arrived safely.” 

“Tell her in code,” said Prabaht. 

Esther seldom made long distance calls on daytime rates, but she 
thought that she really should call Jennifer, as much to be sure every¬ 
thing was all right down there as to tell her that Peter had arrived. Es¬ 
ther dialed Jennifer’s number. The phone emitted the quick buzz of a 
busy circuit. She tried several more times, but didn’t get through. She de¬ 
cided to try a local number. She thought a moment, then dialed the Se¬ 
nior Center. This time she got the longer buzz of a busy line. She tried 
again, and it rang. 

“Tellez Senior Center. Lucy Meadowcroft speaking.” 

“Lucy, this is Esther Pernion. The phone’s been out. I just wanted to 
see if it’s working again.” 

“Are you all right?” Lucy asked. 

“I’m fine, thank you. Do you know what’s been going on?” 

“Not really, but it’s not good.” That was what Esther liked about the 
Tellez Senior Center Director. Lucy didn’t think that you were an idiot 
just because you were old. ‘There’s been some sort of civil upheaval na¬ 
tionwide. The news doesn’t make a lot of sense. You don’t have TV, do 
you?” 

“No.” 

“I guess we can be thankful we’re not in Albuquerque. The electricity’s 
still out. We’re fixing meals here for anyone who needs it.” 

“I’ve got my own electric,” Esther said. 

Prabaht gestured and stage-whispered, “Don’t. Phone taps.” 

Ridiculous, Esther thought. Even if they did tap the line, who would 
listen? The whole population would have to be employed listening to each 
other. The distraction caused her to miss something Lucy said. “Excuse 
me, what was that again?” 


108 


Unde River 


Asimov's 


“I said come on down if you want to watch the news later. But if you’re 
all right, we should clear the line. Now the phone’s back on, I want to give 
everyone a call.” 

“Okay,” said Esther, “thanks. Speak to you later.” 

Only after she hung up did it occur to her to wonder what the Senior 
Center was running its television on. Someone must have brought a gen¬ 
erator over. 

Esther tried Jennifer’s number every hour or so. Usually she got a busy 
circuit signal. About three, it rang, but there was no answer. By then, 
clouds were starting to pile up. If it was going to storm, just as well to get 
the mail today ... and see what there was to see. “Want to ride into town 
with me?” Esther asked. 

“Sure,” said Peter. 

Prabaht looked about wildly, then said, “I’ll come too.” 

“Only if you wash your face and leave the side arms here.” 

Prabaht fidgeted and mumbled, but complied. 

The hood of Esther’s Valiant was still open. Peter checked the various 
fluids. The radiator and oil were both fine. Esther checked them regular¬ 
ly herself. “Check the brake fluid, would you,” Esther called. ‘The cap’s 
too tight for me.” Peter checked it. It was fine too. 

Esther considered her reflexes slow, but she actually zipped right 
along once they hit pavement, and dodged a confused rabbit with no dif¬ 
ficulty. In town, several generators clattered, one of them at the Tellez 
Mercantile, which was open. Esther parked there. She believed it was 
bad for the car to start it an extra time just to drive the fifty yards from 
the store to the post office, though nearly everyone else did just that. 

Esther, Peter, and Prabaht headed for the post office, across the street 
from the courthouse, which was next door to the Tellez Mercantile. As 
they passed the courthouse, Undersheriff Colin Scofield emerged from 
the Sheriff’s Office in back and called out, “Hello.” 

Prabaht froze, a look of panic on his face. 

“Hi, Colin,” Esther answere/d. “Any idea what’s going on?” 

“It’s a mess,” Colin replied, striding toward Esther and her companions 
with notable agility for a man who weighed nearly four hundred pounds. 
“Everything all right with you?” 

“Just fine, except I’ve been trying to call my daughter in Socorro and 
can’t get through.” 

“If it’s an emergency, I could try.” 

“No, just want to be sure she’s okay.” 

“I think the circuits are pretty tied up,” said Colin. “Probably clear out 
later. Let me know if you need anything.” 

“Sure thing. Thanks.” 

Colin headed toward the Tellez Mercantile. 

“You can start breathing again,” said Peter quietly to Prabaht. 

Passing the Torch 109 


February 1997 


“Did you notice how evasive he was?” Prabaht replied, as they contin¬ 
ued on to the post office. 

Stella Martinez, the postmistress, was terribly upset. There had been 
no mail delivery at all yesterday. Today, the mail had come in, almost on 
time, but it was extremely skimpy, and the weekly advertizing circulars 
that should have arrived yesterday still weren’t here. 

“Any idea what’s going on?” Esther asked. 

“It’s the Governors’ Executive Commission,” the postmistress an¬ 
swered. ‘They decided that the Federal Government wasn’t doing enough 
about crime, so they got up a warrant for four million people. Of course, it 
didn’t work very well.” 

“Idiots,” said Esther. 

“That’s not it at all,” Joe Galloway chimed in as he shut his post office 
box and pocketed the key. Joe, in his mid-thirties, with heroic chest and 
shoulders and receding chin and hair, was a part-time logger, part-time 
outfitter’s assistant, and part-time barfly. 

“You heard better news?” Stella asked. 

“Yeah,” said Joe, “just a few minutes ago. They’re saying now that it 
was a sort of palace coup at the F.B.I. They been accused of racism again. 
Got the top dogs at each other’s throats. Someone figured to embarrass 
someone else by issuing this mass arrest order under the Known Crimi¬ 
nals Law.” 

“Any idea who?” asked Prabaht. 

“Nah,” said Joe. “Maybe they’ll say on the five-thirty news.” 

“Well, that’s clear as mud,” said Suzie Romero, who came in just in 
time to hear Joe’s explanation of events. She was older than Esther and 
half Apache, her long hair still more black than grey. 

“Should have grilled Colin,” said Esther. “He certainly acted like the 
cat that ate the ballot box.” 

Suzie, Joe, and Stella all laughed. Manuel Tellez had been sheriff two 
terms, so he couldn’t run again. The primary was only six months off. 

“Colin was on duty when the order came in,” said Stella. “With the 
sheriff out of county delivering a juvenile to Las Cruces, and an arrest list 
of a hundred and ninety-two, he figured that a four-man department 
wasn’t enough personnel. So he’d wait till Manuel got back to do any¬ 
thing.” 

“Pass the buck. Smart man,” said Joe. 

“A hundred and ninety-two people’s 10 percent of the county,” said Es¬ 
ther. ‘That’s a lot of votes.” 

“Sheriff didn’t get back till noon today,” said Stella. “Now Colin’s glad 
he didn’t do anything. State and Feds picked up about thirty people here 
in county. I hear most of them are already planning to sue.” 

“That was fast,” said Esther. 

‘Magistrate gave them the idea.” 


110 


Unde River 


Asimov's 


“Oh?” asked Esther. 

“Colin called Grant Harkins ’cause the jail was full... at five in the 
morning.” 

Joe guffawed. Everyone looked his way. He explained. “Grant closed 
down the Dry Gulch the night before. Bet he had a head like a watermel- 

“He asked Colin where the arrests occurred,” Stella went on. “When 
Colin said at people’s homes, Grant told him to let anyone out that wasn’t 
arrested by the State Police, ’cause the other officers didn’t have jurisdic¬ 
tion. Turned out a BLM Officer signed all the papers. Way I heard it, Col¬ 
in hollered, ‘Weren’t none of these arrests legal,’ opened the doors, and 
told everyone to go home. Of course, anyone that lived out of town was 
stuck for a ride, and it was still just past five A.M.” 

“01’ Colin ain’t so dumb,” said Joe. “He’ll get my vote.” 

“What if there was a real crime, like a hold-up?” asked Peter. 

“Colin’s a crack shot, and he knows this country,” said Joe. 

“If the percentage was the same nationwide,” said Prabaht, “does that 
mean someone tried to arrest twenty-five million people yesterday? That’s 
crazy!” 

“Things looked pretty crazy to me,” said Peter. 

“Oh?” said Joe. 

“Came up from Socorro,” Peter explained. Everyone ignored Prabaht’s 
facial contortions. 

“It’s worse than crazy,” said Suzie. “It’s stupid." 

Nobody said anything about who the hundred and ninety-two people 
on the list for arrest might have been. 

“All these damn generators are giving me a headache,” said Esther. 
“I’m ready to go back where it’s quiet.” She said good-bye and headed for 
the store, tossing the week’s mail into the car on the way. There was a 
letter from her sister, Grace, in Abilene, which she knew would be most¬ 
ly about doctors and barely legible, and half a dozen solicitations to buy 
things she didn’t need and couldn’t afford. At the store, Esther bought a 
can of coffee, a head of lettuce, a pound of bacon, a pound of margarine, a 
gallon of milk, and three onions. She let Peter add three candy bars and a 
bag of chips ... and carry the sack to the car. 

“If you’re too tired, I can drive,” said Peter. 

“I’m just tired of banging generators,” said Esther. “Anyhow, you drive 
too fast.” 

“You’re no slouch yourself.” 

Esther smiled. “I mean on the dirt. Way you crossed the creek this 
morning, you’d punch the shocks right through the floor.” 

Esther invited Prabaht to join them for dinner. He accepted, but sug¬ 
gested they stop at his house for a chunk of meat. 

Prabaht had taken an elk that fall, sort of legally. He had a license, for 

Passing the Torch 111 


February 1997 

bow season, but his method was a little unusual. He lassoed his elk from 
a tree, then jumped down on its back and slit its throat. Between being 
stiff from waiting nearly forty hours for an elk to walk under him and the 
fact that the elk fought back, Prabaht was half-crippled for a month af¬ 
terward. 

He had a somewhat unorthodox freezer too, an old camper shell he had 
buried and lined with foam insulation. He had to crawl in with a flash¬ 
light to get anything. The compressor ran directly off a water-wheel on 
the creek. Prabaht intended to generate electricity off the same water¬ 
wheel, but never got around to building the system. He had been in a war 
for a year with the State Engineer, known locally as the Water God of the 
West, over the water-wheel. Prabaht claimed that he didn’t realize he 
needed permission, since it was nonconsumptive use. “Mean-ass, mur¬ 
dering son-of-a-bitch is just trying to deny my permit ’cause I applied af¬ 
ter the fact! Bastard’ll claim I need a permit to breathe air next!” 

“Do you like acorn squash?” Esther asked, to change the subject. 

“Sure,” said Peter. 

“Good. You clean a couple. They’re in the back bedroom. I’m ready for 
another little nap. If I’m asleep in an hour, rub them down with oil, and 
set them in the oven on three seventy-five.” 

Esther dumped the junk mail in the firestarter box, set the letter from 
her sister on the side table by her chair, and took a toke from her pipe. 
“Help yourself,” she said to Peter. Then she lay down and pulled the blue 
wool blanket over herself. She wasn’t really sleepy. She just needed to 
withdraw and think. 

Esther let the generator banging seep out of her brain. 

“Shit,” Esther heard Peter say from outside, she frowned at his choice 
of word, “she must have ten years of firewood!” Esther wondered if 
Prabaht’s not-quite-audible reply bore any resemblance to reality. 

Most people locally considered it gross tyranny that the Forest Service 
required a permit for local firewood usage. Esther bought permits from 
the Forest Service for the full ten cord personal use maximum and then 
got someone to cut the wood for her on a one third-two thirds share. That 
ten cords’ worth of permit always produced a few extra cords. Everyone 
Esther had dealt with took as much pride in delivering her fair third as 
they did in getting something unauthorized out of the Forest Service. 

Prabaht probably was embellishing this simple conflict with extrava¬ 
gant conspiracy fantasies, Esther thought, and yet. . . She realized that 
the world her great grandson was growing up into was what she needed 
to contemplate. 

Esther thought back. When she’d divorced Jerome, in the early sixties, 
it was already not the shock such events had been only a decade earlier. 
Still, it was traumatic. Stolid Jennifer’s marriage had been traumatic, 
the divorce a relief. 


112 


Uncle River 


Asimov's 


Sylvia ... It pained Esther to think of her granddaughter’s chaotic life. 
She couldn’t blame Jennifer. Jennifer could be overbearing, but she was 
the stable one. It was Esther who undertook risque adventures: hitchhik¬ 
ing at seventy, smoking pot—let alone growing it. People Prabaht’s age 
thought nothing of smoking pot, approve or disapprove, but Esther still 
knew hardly anyone of her own generation who smoked. 

Now there was Peter. With no stable male role model, with an up¬ 
bringing far more chaotic than his mother’s, he seemed bright and well- 
adjusted. What was she to make of it all? Perhaps it was easier to grow 
up sane in a blatantly insane world than to watch apparent stability dis¬ 
integrate. Esther recalled the insanities of her own youth called Hitler 
and Stalin, the shocks of World War II, the bomb, the Kennedy assassi¬ 
nation, the increasing social turbulence ever since. 

In Esther’s youth, the world had an apparent order, with its clearly de¬ 
fined good and its evil, its stability of family, community, and religion, 
and its aberrations of war and Depression. That was no longer so. 
Prabaht’s paranoia, Colin’s opportunism—personality flaws, sure, but 
they were also part of the society her great-grandson was growing to 
adulthood in. What was she to make of it? What, on the summit of her 
life’s long climb, could she give him to help him make sense of the un¬ 
known world he would live in? 

Esther could hear the low hum of Peter talking with Prabaht: A good 
man, she thought, but a walking encyclopaedia of misinformation. Could 
someone Peter’s age understand that? Peter’s a sharp kid, she thought, 
but what does he have to measure his perspective against? 

Still alert, Esther drifted in the spirit realm of her own mind. 

Subjective and objective, how was one to tell? The creek and juniper 
trees on the bluff, now that was objective. A feeling came to Esther that 
she knew she had felt before. It belonged to the spirit realm, which made 
it all the more difficult to differentiate subjective and objective: an inten¬ 
sification of the nearby and a dissipation of the larger but farther away. 
Is it my nearing death? she thought. That seemed redundant. You could 
not live alone, so isolated, at forty-two, let alone eighty-two, without con¬ 
fronting your own death. A long-familiar companion, death taught an 
awe that enhanced the canyon’s beauty to her aging senses. 

Esther thought of the events of the last two days. Whatever lunacy had 
occurred nationally, the effects were local wherever you were: Lucy 
Meadowcroft having access to a generator, Grant Harkins being hung- 
over. True everywhere, but more obvious in Tellez because you knew 
everybody. 

Esther felt the spirits all around her. They were like colors and flavors, 
but she had no names for them. 

Esther had tried church once, around the time of the divorce, and had 
been cruelly snubbed for the very reasons she needed spiritual solace. 

Passing the Torch 113 


February 1997 

She had learned some Apache and Zuni names for spirits, but, well, she 
wasn’t Apache or Zuni. After all these years, it still bothered her not to 
have a handle on the substance of her own soul. Thinking of Peter, she 
realized, as she had before but with great immediacy and poignancy, that 
this was not just a personal condition. 

Values, Esther thought. No one can really tell him what to do, how to 
act, what to call the brightness the pot helps me see when I close my eyes 
but have no name for. And not just because he’s young and spunky. No 
one knows. I certainly don’t know what he’ll need to know next week, let 
alone by the time he’s my age! That’s always so, but it has so speeded up 
in my lifetime. I remember the first talking movies, and now you can 
have a videophone if you’re rich. Fast as things change, 1 might even live 
long enough to have one. I read once that the first ballpoint pens cost 
thirty-five dollars, and now look at how cheap they are. Would I want a 
videophone? What values is Peter learning? It’s not what values I would 
teach him if I had any idea what to teach, Esther thought. It’s what val¬ 
ues does he learn from his own experience? What can I give him that he 
can make any sense of at all? 

Esther opened her eyes. There was a dim lavender glow as the last of 
the sunset reflected off thickening clouds beyond sun-faded curtains. She 
was not aware of having slept, but the squash were in the oven and it 
was on. The elk meat was also on the stove, stewing with onions and gar¬ 
lic Esther could smell. 

Esther stepped outside. The air felt balmy and smelled wet. She went 
back in and checked the food. The squash had not been in long. The stew¬ 
ing meat needed water, which she added. She wondered if Prabaht or Pe¬ 
ter would think to check it before the meat scorched. Esther sat down to 
read her novel. She certainly hoped that whatever insanity was going on 
in the world would not affect the State Library Books by Mail program. 
She had read barely a page when Prabaht and Peter came back in. 

“We followed the chickens, but we didn’t find any eggs,” said Peter. “I’ll 
try again in the morning.” 

“Okay. Shall we try calling your grandmother again?” 

“Sure.” 

Esther dialed Jennifer’s number. The line rang, but there was still no 
answer. She hung up after the tenth ring. 

“How ’bout some tunes,” said Prabaht. 

Concerned for her daughter, Esther looked up and blinked. “What? Oh, 
sure.” Sometimes Prabaht could be amazingly insensitive. Esther turned 
to Peter. “Would you like to pick a tape?” 

“Okay.” Peter looked about, spotted the basket of tapes on the shelf be¬ 
low the player, and rummaged through them. “How about this one?” he 
said, holding the tape out to Esther. 

It was her Glenn Miller tape, a little scratchy, as the records had been 

114 Unde River 


Asimov's 

pretty worn by the time she’d recorded them onto the tape, but still one of 
her favorites. “Sure.” She smiled. 

Peter put the tape in the player and turned it on. “In the Mood” re¬ 
called a world in which Esther had been younger than her great-grand¬ 
son was now. Her foot tapped a bit of long-remembered rhythm. 

A few minutes later, the phone rang. Esther answered. “Hello.” 

“Hello, Mom.” 

“Jennifer, are you all right? I’ve been trying to call all day.” 

“I’m fine. Is Peter there?” 

“Yes. Do you want to speak to him?” 

“In a minute. I mostly wanted to be sure he made it okay.” 

“He’s fine.” 

“If I’d had any idea ...” 

Esther noticed Prabaht gesticulating, his eyes wild again. 

“It’s not so bad up here. What’s happened? Are you home?” 

“Yes,” said Jennifer, “finally. There was a fire.” 

“There?” 

“No, a couple blocks away, but they evacuated the neighborhood. There 
was some looting. I believe someone was shot. They just let me come 
home.” 

“Is everything all right?” 

“It seems to be. The electricity’s still out, but things are calmed down 
now, and the fire’s out... or not spreading at least.” 

“Good Lord!” 

“Mom, would it be too much trouble if Peter stayed with you a few 
days—maybe even till after Thanksgiving?” 

“Good heavens, Jen, you don’t have to ask!" 

“I don’t want to impose.” 

That’s Jennifer, Esther thought. She’d carry the world on her shoulders 
if it turned to silly putty. “It’s no imposition at ah. He’s a pleasure to have.” 
And I’m not too old to want my great-grandson where he’s safe, Esther 
thought, but did not say in front of the boy. “Are you all right down there?” 

“Yes. And I’m not sure I could get to you,” Jennifer responded to her 
mother’s unvoiced suggestion. “There are roadblocks. They’ve called out 
the National Guard....” 

“They’re not still trying to arrest half the country, are they?” Esther 
asked. 

“Oh, no,” said Jennifer, “except looters. They’re plenty busy now just 
trying to restore order.” 

Whoever “they” are and whatever that means, Esther thought. “Well, 
it’s certainly a relief to hear your voice,” she said. “Have you heard any¬ 
thing from Sylvia?” 

“Her boyfriend was picked up, but they released him on his own recog¬ 
nizance today.” 


Passing the Torch 


115 


February 1997 


“What did they charge him with?” 

“That’s not real clear.” 

“No, I suppose not. I’m just glad you’re safe. Here’s Peter.” 

Peter told Jennifer less of his adventurous ride than he had told Es¬ 
ther. Esther could tell Jennifer was admonishing Peter not to impose. 
She doubted this was useful advice. Jennifer achieved little but to make 
Peter uncomfortable. 

No harm done, apparently. Peter’s discomfort melted the instant he 
handed the phone back to Esther. “You take care,” Esther said, “and 
don’t worry about Peter and me. We’re just fine.” 

Prabaht’s eyes flared wild, and he gnawed at his lower lip, but he had 
sense enough not to pester. Esther felt sorry for Prabaht’s perpetual anx¬ 
iety. She knew he had at least moments of self-awareness. He had once 
said: “The one nice thing about paranoia is that you get so many pleas¬ 
ant surprises when the disasters you expect don’t happen.” 

“Pennsylvania Six Five Thousand,” said the tape. 

Dinner was excellent. The warm leading edge of the front still made a 
fire unnecessary, but thick clouds reduced the moon’s light. Esther of¬ 
fered Prabaht the loan of a flashlight to walk home, but he said he didn’t 
need it. 

“Just don’t fall in the creek and get your guns wet,” said Peter. 

Esther sighed inwardly. What was the boy learning from his life? 

When Esther woke in the morning, the house was still fairly warm, but 
she could see snow coming down fast and thick in the growing light. She 
lit the wood stove, then filled the kettle to heat. Peter appeared just as 
Esther finished pouring water into the paper towel/coffee filter, attracted 
by the aroma, she figured. 

“Wow!” Peter said, “it never snows like this in Socorro! Think we’ll be 
snowed in?” 

“I certainly wouldn’t drive in it,” Esther said. She poured them each a 
mug, added milk to hers and asked, “Do you want milk?” 

“No, thanks,” said Peter. 

“I hope you’ll drink some,” said Esther. “I can’t use up a gallon myself.” 

“How about cornbread to go with the beans?” Peter picked up the mug 
of black coffee and carried it to the window. “Maybe I can find where the 
chickens are nesting in the snow.” 

“If they’re laying any.” 

Esther carried her coffee to her chair. Peter continued to stand at the 
window. “Can I call you G. E.?” Peter asked abruptly. 

“G. E.?” 

“For Granny Esther.” 

“No. That’s awful. If you’re too big to call me Granny, just call me Es¬ 
ther like everyone else.” 

“I’d feel funny.” 


116 


Unde River 


Asimov's 

“It’s a funny world.” Esther peered over her coffee at her tall great- 
grandson. His face mostly looked eager. 

“I’m going to see if I can find any eggs,” said Peter. 

“You got gloves?” 

“Nah. It’s not that cold.” 

Esther didn’t reply. She was pretty sure there were some gloves that 
would fit him ... somewhere, if the mice hadn’t gotten to them. What she 
did say was, “I’m going to put on some oatmeal. Want any?” 

“Okay.” He slipped on his light-weight brown leather jacket and a 
green-and-yellow ball cap. “I’ll be back in a few.” And out he plunged into 
the snow. 

That looks like fun, Esther thought. Maybe I’ll go out in it myself later. 

She set on a pot of oatmeal and tossed in a big handful of two-year-old 
dried apricots. (Spring frosts had done in the blossoms this year and 
last.) Then she sat in her chair to contemplate. Two days in a row of 
Prabaht really was a little much, even without having a stroke and the 
world going nuts. But Peter ... she was enjoying having him here, for all 
it was a distraction. Distraction from what? she wondered. From whatev¬ 
er it is I do sitting in this chair when I’m alone, she decided. Still, having 
a young person need her felt good. She hoped he wouldn’t be too bored be¬ 
tween now and Thanksgiving. 

The oatmeal got done; Esther turned it off. The snow fell so thick that 
she couldn’t see the car. A person could get lost in a hurry in a storm 
like this, but how lost could a person get in a canyon a hundred yards 
wide? 

A few minutes later, Peter stomped up to the door. “I couldn’t see a 
thing,” he blurted. “Bet I can find them in the snow when it quits, 
though.” 

“Good idea.” Esther handed Peter the broom. “Brush off on the porch 
so you don’t soak yourself and the house.” 

An hour later, the snow turned to rain. It poured all day long. “Think 
the creek’ll flood?” Peter asked. 

“Probably not,” Esther answered, “but it will come up.” 

It did just that. They heard it through the rain. Peter dashed out dur¬ 
ing a lull toward late afternoon to look. He came back only moderately 
soggy. “Bet it’s up a foot,” he said. “Hey, what do you do about the phone 
bill if you can’t get out in winter for a month?” 

Esther was impressed. Peter had been visiting her for longer or short¬ 
er stays all his life. He knew she kept food and propane well-stocked for 
just such a contingency. He really was growing up even to think of such a 
question. 

“I usually keep a couple months credit,” Esther said. “But don’t let that 
give you ideas about calling all your friends.” 

They both blushed, then laughed. 

Passing the Torch 


117 


February 1997 

“It’s a local phone company,” Esther added. “If I do get behind, they’re 
nice about it.” 

“That’s different.” 

“They’re related to half the county. Would you want two hundred 
great-grandmothers mad at you?” 

Peter gave his great-grandmother a look of horror. They both laughed 
again. 

Esther did make cornbread to go with the beans that evening. Peter of¬ 
fered to do the dishes. Esther accepted. 

“Hey, there’s a puddle,” Peter said. 

Esther looked. “I forgot about that.” She recalled now, her attempt to 
call a plumber. I must have been in worse shape than I realized to do that 
without asking Prabaht or someone to try to fix it first. Wonder who I 
called. . . . She recalled looking in the phone book under plumbers. . . . 
Good Lord, I think I dialed the one in Arizona with the big ad! 

“It wasn’t here yesterday,” Peter said. 

“It was the day before. I thought there was something wrong with the 
drain.” 

“Or the drainage.” Peter looked out the window where the rain contin¬ 
ued to pour down from the once again impenetrable night sky. “Did it 
rain a couple of days ago?” 

“Some.” 

“1 could look under the house.” 

“I’d appreciate it,” said Esther, “but this will do till daylight.” She 
tossed him an old towel. 

By morning, the rain had slowed to an intermittent drizzle. The creek, 
double its usual width and two feet deep, flowed muddy and turbulent. 
Peter ran out, delighted to watch it rumble past. Esther put on an old yel¬ 
low rain coat with a nice, snug hood and joined him. 

“This is great!” Peter shouted over the rushing water. “How long do 
you think it’ll last?” 

“At least all day,” Esther shouted back, “even if it doesn’t rain any¬ 
more.” 

A little later, over a cup of tea and the pipe, Peter looked at his great¬ 
grandmother, seriously, and said, “Gra .. . Esther, do you think ... that 
is .. . Could I... Could I stay here?” 

Esther was not really surprised by the question, but she thought before 
answering. He was having an adventure now. That would wear off. She 
would feel useful, and she had to admit it would be a help. But her privacy 
... She had a brief flash of suspicion. I lad Jennifer put him up to this? She 
felt ashamed of that thought at once. I’m getting as paranoid as Prabaht, 
she thought. The world’s getting loonier all the time. He’d certainly be safer 
here. Finally she answered, “Wouldn’t you be bored to death?” 

“I don’t think so. Prabaht was talking about running a trap line .. .” 


118 


Unde River 


Asimov's 


“Heaven help us!” 

“What’s wrong?” 

“Prabaht tried that last winter. He has got to be the world’s least com¬ 
petent trapper. His total take consisted of one jack rabbit—by accident, 
because he forgot to bait that trap.” 

“He told me about that. He wasn’t properly equipped. He only had his 
traps out the last couple weeks of the season.” 

“What makes you think he’ll do any better this year?” 

“I’ll be with him.” 

How could she answer that? It wasn’t important. What mattered was 
his future, and, for her, whether she could live with a sixteen-year-old 
boy. He would have friends. He would have girlfriends. He would have 
his own taste in music. 

“We could try it, maybe, if your grandmother agrees.” She felt a twinge 
at leaving his mother out of the picture, but Sylvia was out of the picture. 
“I’d want you to go to school.” 

“What for?” 

She was a little shocked he was so forthright. “I’m not sure, but it is 
still important to finish high school... I think.” 

“Well, okay.” He sounded a little less enthusiastic. 

“You still want to stay?” 

‘Yes.” Almost defiant. 

“Let’s see.” 

“I could help you out.” 

“I know that.” She didn’t intend the edge to her voice she knew was 
there. 

Peter didn’t notice. “Grandma says .. .” 

“. .. Says I’m too old to take care of myself and shouldn’t stay up here 
alone anymore.” 

Peter heard the edge now. “I didn’t mean ...” 

“I almost croaked the other day.” 

Peter’s mouth fell halfway open. 

“But I didn’t. Maybe I’ll drop dead right now. Maybe I’ll live to be a 
hundred and fifty....” 

Neither of them knew what to say. 

What if I become incapacitated in a year? Esther thought. Should a boy 
his age be saddled with that? It was the thing she really feared most, far 
more than she feared the possibility of dying messily alone. “Let’s see 
how we both feel in a week,” Esther finally said. 

“Okay,” Peter answered. 

It rained off and on in the night, but by morning there were patches of 
blue. The creek was still up. About ten, Prabaht showed up with a news¬ 
paper, only slightly damp. He spread it on the kitchen table so they all 
could see it. 


Passing the Torch 


119 


February 1997 

‘Top Officials Deny Responsibility,” read the biggest headline. So what 
else is new? Esther thought. 

“Here’s the real news.” Prabaht turned to page five. 

Esther’s eyes landed on the largest headline on the page: “Ohio At¬ 
torney General Doubts Warrants.” The article began: “Citing several 
cases making their way through the courts, Ohio Attorney General 
Arthur McGuire doubts ‘John Doe Warrants’ will suffice for female de¬ 
tainees.” 

“See.” Prabaht pointed to a smaller article. Esther read the headline: 
“Bishop Deplores Suffering.” The article was about how the Diocese of 
Las Cruces was helping people displaced by the continuing civil disorder. 

“I don’t get it,” said Peter. 

“What bishop?” Prabaht pointed to the end of the brief article. 

Peter read aloud: “ ‘On behalf of the bishop, Special Aide Father Luis 
Morales.’ So? It’s crazy in Cruces too.” 

“You left out the important part,” Prabaht replied ominously. He read: 
“ ‘Special Aide Father Luis Morales, S.J.’ ” 

“So what?” said Peter. 

“Don’t you see?" said Prabaht. “The whole thing was a set-up by the Je¬ 
suits!” 

Esther tuned out. 

If Peter stayed, she’d need to move the squash and put a stove in that 
back bedroom. She had plenty of firewood anyhow. 

Prabaht said something about logging trucks rolling again. 

“In this slop?” said Peter. 

“On pavement.” Then Prabaht veered off to expound on the effect on lo¬ 
cal employment of a proposed $1.50 a gallon fuel tax. 

Much as it pleased her that Peter understood such an issue, Esther’s 
concerns carried her away from the conversation. “I could do with some 
quiet. Why don’t you take it out in the sunshine,” she said. 

Peter and Prabaht went outside. Esther sat in her comfortable chair 
and contemplated. 

Subjective and objective. Esther felt that she understood, at least a bit 
more, what she perceived in the spirit realm. Out there in the big world, 
the events of the last few days made everything just a little more dis¬ 
jointed, made everyone just a little more dissociated from a social order 
that had seemed so certain when Esther was Peter’s age. 

I’ve been fighting Jennifer over my independence, Esther thought. The 
objective and subjective meet in funny ways. I’m still not sure about liv¬ 
ing with anyone, but it is getting harder to manage. And Peter needs 
something too. That makes it all different. 

Worth my privacy? Worth my independence? Better him than a 
stranger. I could tell him about the cigarette and the awning. A story like 
that would only annoy Jennifer, only frighten Sylvia. Peter would get a 


120 


Unde River 


Asimov's 

kick out of it, and because he would, he would learn a little of the so-solid 
world I was that girl in. 

I have no idea how he should live, but he could use to hear of a world 
that was solid once, to know such a thing is possible. Jennifer can’t give 
him that, just because she’s too solid herself. Subjective and objective. 

There’s been a special light in my life. I’ve called it Freedom. I’ve called 
it this canyon. Jerome never saw it. Jennifer seemed determined not to 
see it. Sylvia . . . I’m not sure she’s ever been there enough to know what 
she sees, like Prabaht. 

Am I indulging in wishful thinking, hoping Peter is someone to pass 
the torch to, wanting the end of my life to have meaning? 

I don’t have to answer to that question, Esther thought, and smiled. I 
see his hand reached out, to receive and to give—even if neither of us 
knows quite what. • 


CLARION WEST 


Applications are now being accepted for the 1997 Clarion West Writers 
Workshop in Seattle. This intensive six-week workshop prepares writers for 
professional careers in science fiction and fantasy. 

Only 20 students will be selected for the workshop, which runs from June 
15 to July 25, 1997. Instructors include Elizabeth Hand, Michael Bishop, 
Lucius Shepard, Samuel R. Delany, Beth Meacham, and Nicola Griffith. 

Applications should be postmarked on or before April 1, 1997. A 
complete application includes: 

*A cover letter discussing where you've been, what you've been doing, 
your writing history (if any), and why you want to attend the workshop, 
*20-30 pages of typed, double-spaced original manuscript (1-2 short 
stories or a novel excerpt with outline), 

*A non-refundable $25 application fee payable to Clarion West, 
‘Completed financial aid forms if applicable. (Limited financial aid is 
available; forms should be requested in advance by writing to Clarion 
West, or by calling 541/686-2605, or by email at 74634.2056@com- 
puserve.com.) 

Completed applications should be sent to Clarion West, 340 Fifteenth 
Avenue East, Suite 350, Seattle, WA 98112. 

Participants can expect to pay tuition of $1,300, minus $100 if their 
application is postmarked before March 1, 1997 Dorm housing and 
college credit are available at additional cost. 




Passing the Torch 


121 



William John Watkins 


17 QUESTIONS THE JUDGES HI 
NUREMBERG FORGOT TO ASK 

1. Did a hair 
floating in the sink 

bring them up short, shaving? 

2. Did horror well up 
from the clogged drain? 

3. Did they fish out nests 
of the family's hair, 
matted and drenched, 
without a hint of recognition? 

4. Did they ever wake sobbing? 

5. Did they strop razors 
to surgical sharpness 
without a qualm, 
waiting for the screaming 
to die down in the mirror? 

6. Did false teeth in a glass 
strike sudden terror into them, 
those dentists with hammers 
tap-tapping among the dead? 

7. Did their teeth 

ever ache without reason? 

8. Did they ever wake sobbing 
to the sound of sobbing? 






9. Were there ever bones in their soup? 

10. Did pepper ever feel like furnace ash? 

11. Did the sausages in the pan 
ever steal up on them and turn 
at the last instant 

into the stench of the ovens? 

12. Did they get up abruptly 
from their meals, 

their burgher stomachs 
suddenly sour? 

13. Did they ever wake sobbing 
to the sound of sobbing 

and find it their own? 

14. Did the windshriek 
waiting for the trolley 

ever startle them into half-confessions 
there in the street 
with no one to listen? 

15. Did the squeal 
of the trolley wheels 
on cold rails 

make them shrink back, afraid? 

16. Or was a job, 
after so many years, 
still a job? 

17. Did they ever wake sobbing 
to the sound of sobbing 

and find it their own, 
and go back to sleep 
without ever admitting it, 
even to themselves? 






Phillip C. Jennings's new tale unfolds at d dizzying ! I ' 
pace, as most of the known universe discovers it 
can't keep up with ... 


Illustration by Jason C. Eckhardt 


Phillip C. Jennings 







February 1997 

S hadows stretched across the fields, and the sun plummeted. Sunset. 
Darkness blanketed Hidalgo. 

Peder had never been aware of the clock-calendar glowing on his bed¬ 
room wall, not like now. Numbers blinked—09 changed to 10. 

10 1021 08. After all those lessons it finally meant something! It was 
the 10th day of the 1021st trift of year 8. Peder had memorized his num¬ 
bers and letters, but now they possessed a power. They weren’t just 
sounds in a chant. They represented concepts like the passage of time. 

Nurse Carmen smiled at Peder. He saw curiosity in her brown eyes, 
and hope. “Do you remember coming here? It was late last trift, just after 
free time.” 

Peder’s voice was rough. He talked seldom and his tongue wasn’t 
honed for speech. “I was bad. I went to the fence. We were running in the 
fields, and I went to the fence.” 

“Yes. Never do that. It’s too close to the Higgs generator. I had to fetch 
you.” 

“Sorry. I don’t remember after that.” Peder looked around. 

Carmen touched his forehead. Her hand was cool. “Doctor Moeller gave 
you a new medicine. You’ll remember everything, not just special times 
and traumas. You’ll have a different life from now on.” 

It was already different for Peder. Looking at Carmen, he got an erec¬ 
tion. 

Erections came when—what was her name?—played the rubbing 
game with Peder, and afterward Doctor Moeller yelled at them, and the 
nurses got angry and took them apart. But this time all Peder did was 
look at Carmen’s front. 

Carmen put up her hand. “That’s not polite. You shouldn’t stare at 
women like that.” 

Her voice dropped. “It’s going to be hard work. You have to learn every¬ 
thing, all at once.” 

“Sorry. Sorry sorry sorry.” Outside the window, the skies were black. 
Peder made himself turn and look east, waiting for the colors of ap¬ 
proaching dawn. 

“I hope we did the right thing,” Carmen said after a contemplative 
pause. “In the long run you’ll be happier. You’ll live a more useful life. Hi¬ 
dalgo might become a colony, not just an institute.” 

Sunrise. Long shadows. High winds rippled the buckylayer. Day 10 
grew bright, and shadows fled the sweeping light. Peder watched them 
shrink and separate. “Is today a meal day?” he asked. 

“Today we’ll see how well you learn to dress yourself. First thing to¬ 
morrow we’ll eat in the commissary,” Carmen said. 

“Will there be lots of women?” Peder asked miserably. He cast his 
thoughts into the future, like he’d never done before. Lots of fronts. More 
erections. “Will they yell at me?” 


126 


Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 

Carmen sorted among answers. “Yes,” she said finally. “Call it ‘yelling 1 
if you want. A better word is ‘teaching.’ Here are your clothes.” 

Clothes had always been tricky for Peder. All those sleeves and legs, 
and what was inside and what was outside, and getting the stickies lined 
up right. He wanted the fun of having Carmen dress him, but somehow 
he could tell—not today. Today he did the work of figuring out which was 
tunic and which was pants, and the inside-outside business didn’t seem 
like a problem at all. He got the stickies on his tunic wrong, but he could 
tell they were wrong. He fixed them so everything lined up straight. 

Peder managed his socks and shoes. He felt proud. It wasn’t even sun¬ 
set. Carmen smiled. “Let’s go eat.” 

“Wait! That’s me!” Peder just now saw himself in the mirror. He was 
like the numbers on the clock-calendar, because there was more meaning 
in his face than he’d ever noticed before. He fingered his tousled blond 
hair, and studied his looks: curiosity, a smile, a frown, a blink, tongue 
out-and-in. 

The room grew dark. Day 10 was in decline. Carmen opened the hall¬ 
way door, and led the way. Peder watched her move. He sang the A-B-C 
song to make his new erection go away. They reached the commissary. 

It was like being thrown in water to learn how to swim. Peder saw 
meanings everywhere, in how the institute staff looked and helped, 
putting on special faces to take care of—them? Who were they? Strange 
and chaotic and deformed, but not Peder. Grunts for words, but not Ped¬ 
er. 

Peder went down the line to get a bowl of porridge. Carmen led him to 
a table. Doctor Moeller was there. So were some others. Peder had played 
with them, running in the fields, but he didn’t know their names. Now 
they looked at him the same way he looked at them. They were amazed, 
and fearful. 

Doctor Moeller smiled. Perfect white teeth flashed in her dark face. 
“Trift 1021! The first trift of your new lives! Welcome. Peder, you know 
Michiko and Hakim and Sanjay here.” She put her hand on Sanjay’s 
shoulder. “We’re expecting Olga. After breakfast we’ll start you in special 
classes. You’ve all satisfied the requirements for Cra 103, which is how 
they’re naming medications nowadays, so you should all be having simi¬ 
lar experiences. You’re in the same boat.” 

“Like brothers and sisters,” Carmen explained. 

‘Will we keep together?” Sanjay asked. 

“Yes. You have a strong need for the familiar. We’ve made a schedule 
for you. Things will happen by the clock.” 

In another part of the room a patient started yelling at the top of his 
voice: “Bad boy! Bad boy!” Institute staff gathered to soothe him. He was 
heavy and squat and noisy, and they almost got him quiet. He yelled less 
frequently, anyhow. They persuaded him to lumber out of the room. Ped- 

The Runaways 127 


February 1997 


er noticed that the people at his table looked like him. The people at an¬ 
other table sat in wheelchairs, and had to be fed. 

People came in categories. Some categories were worse than others. 
Michiko and Peder and the others at this table—here came Olga to join 
them—were a special type. They made Doctor Moeller and Carmen hap¬ 
py. Nobody else in the commissary looked like people on TV, not even the 
staff, but Peder’s group did. They were young and trim, and there wasn’t 
anything physically wrong with them. 

Among this select group Peder was tallest, strong and broad across the 
shoulders. Now he was smart, too. “Cra 103,” Peder repeated. He re¬ 
membered the name. He remembered Sanjay’s name, and Michiko’s. 
Hakim was the black kid at the end of the table. Peder smiled. He re¬ 
membered everything! He could put things together, and figure things 
out! 

After breakfast the group went on a walk. It was dawn again, shadows 
and ripples and the usual strong wind. The red of the sky faded to orange 
as the sun climbed. The wind at their backs gave length to their strides. 
Carmen drove them hard, so that Michiko asked “Why so fast? We’re al¬ 
most running.” 

“Some of you have too much energy,” Carmen explained. “We don’t 
want a bunch of pregnancies.” 

She’d been dressed in a white nurse’s uniform. Now she wore a wind- 
breaker and hiking shoes, and Peder sensed a freshness about her. They 
passed the eastern grainfields, and climbed Gopo Hill. From this spot 
they could see much of Hidalgo. The north pole blinked off at a slant to 
their distant right. Carmen pointed out the fence she called the equator 
to their far left, but Peder didn’t know where to look among the ridges 
and trees and pylons. They were so high that the ripples gusting across 
the buckylayer would have been visible, but they were visible anyhow, 
because it was sunset. 

Carmen flicked on her flashlight. They followed her lead, huffing 
breathlessly around Persian Hole. After this came dawn and day in the 
wildlands, with the winds whistling through the young trees, and then 
sunset and night. Dawn came again in the western grainfields, where the 
Higgs generator was hidden behind its fence, except they were way north 
of that. The skies brightened and the sun shone on the buildings of the 
institute. They were far enough north that the circumference of Hidalgo 
was a mere two-and-a-half day hike. 

Was this supposed to wear Peder out? It didn’t work. They sat down for 
reading lessons, his imagination full of the rhythms of buttocks and hips 
and pumping legs. Slim Michiko! Buxom Olga! Beautiful Carmen! Peder 
reigned back from a half dozen erections, only by concentrating and re¬ 
concentrating on the words in the story cassette Carmen gave him. 

It was Treasure Island. A movie came with the cassette. After recita- 


128 


Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 


tions Peder played it page by page on his readscreen. It made him wish 
Hidalgo had an ocean like Earth, something bigger than Lake Lago. 

Lago was a patch of blue on a piece of sculpture next to the globe of 
Earth. Hidalgo was longer than round, and cratered, and wrinkled. Car¬ 
men took a short break and came back in a white tunic and skirt. She 
told the group all about their world. 

Hidalgo would never be a big colony because it was shattered inside. 
This was bad for mining and other deep work, but Hidalgo had a weird 
orbit and that made it interesting. Now that dark matter had given it a 
normal Earth gravity, people didn’t have to worry about it coming 
apart. 

“What we have to worry about is collecting too much dark matter—too 
many asteroids acting like real worlds in the same solar system. We’re 
going to have to use Higgs technology to tug problematical asteroids into 
huger orbits. Uh, is any of this making sense to you? They told me to 
push you, but I’m getting way ahead of my own program.” 

Peder didn’t know what she was talking about. He glanced out the 
classroom window. What he saw amazed him. “ That’s Carmen! Carmen 
out there, and Carmen in here! Two Carmens!” 

The others stood to look. Carmen rapped for attention. “Actually I’m 
one of three. My parents came in Year 5, because my mother was preg¬ 
nant with identical triplets. On Earth that’s illegal. It’s against the popu¬ 
lation laws. She chose to emigrate rather than abort us.” 

‘Three Carmens!” Olga said. 

She sighed. “We call ourselves Carmen. We work in relays, because the 
patients at the institute never got the idea of triplets. You lumped us to¬ 
gether. Using different names got you upset. But now we don’t have to 
make that compromise. Now you can call me Rachel.” 

Hakim raised his hand. “Who made us be patients at the institute? 
How did we get here?” 

Rachel shook her head. “Some mysteries I’m here to solve for you, and 
some mysteries you’ll solve on your own. Why are you here? For each of 
you, that’s a separate mystery. We can’t always tell you the answer. Lots 
of times Doctor Moeller made promises not to tell. But none of you were 
born on Hidalgo. I can say that much.” 

Out the window, the shadows cast by young trees began growing long 
again. Windbreaker-Carmen disappeared around the corner of a build¬ 
ing. “Triplets” was a special word for “miracle,” but Rachel calmed Peder 
and her other students by making them count their breaths, and then 
they had an arithmetic lesson. 

Toward the end they took a test. Question 3—“Towerblock A gets a 
hundred boxes of relief rations a day. If the towerblock gang steals ten, 
how much does that leave?” 

Question 9—“If there are 1440 minutes in an Earth day, and an Earth 

The Runaways 129 


February 1997 

day is one trift long in Hidalgo time, how many minutes are there in a 
Hidalgo day?” 

Question 14—“The mass of Earth is 6,000,000,000,000,000 million 
metric tons. If the mass of a colony asteroid is 25,000 million metric tons, 
how much dark matter has to concentrate to make that asteroid the 
same mass as Earth?” 

These questions were beyond the group even as reading exercises. In 
their distress they talked together, working on each problem as a class. 
Rachel gave them hints (“Fifty days in a trift, remember?”), and some¬ 
how they made do until classtime was over. 

It was lunchday. “Do we have to eat in the commissary with those oth¬ 
ers?” Olga asked, wrinkling her nose. 

“Yes.” Peder could tell that Olga’s question upset their teacher, even 
though she tried to hide it. As Rachel led them out of the room, she 
asked: “What about after lunch? Normally you have a four-day nap. Per¬ 
haps in the future you’d rather schedule time for exercise.” 

“Games!” Sanjay suggested. “I’m not tired. I hate naptime.” 

“Games!” Michiko agreed. 

Rachel shook her head. “Not right away. We can’t change your sched¬ 
ules on the spur of the moment. We have to make arrangements. We 
have to find staff people to supervise. Naptime is normally a break for us. 
Next trift, maybe.” 

The group ate at their separate table. Despite more protests, they were 
escorted to their rooms. Peder lay down in darkness. The kid next room 
over had P-W Syndrome. He whined constantly about being hungry. His 
noise kept Peder awake. Peder wouldn’t have slept anyhow. It was the 
medicine. Peder didn’t know how to sleep, with his mind darting among 
so many ideas. , 

The clock blinked Day 29. He got up in his rumpled clothes, and 
watched the sunrise. Someone in the girls’ dorm was working her win¬ 
dow open. Michiko? Yes! 

Peder opened his window. There was a wire-mesh screen. It was 
screwed into place. He cast around. What could he use? He had an exten¬ 
sion lamp on springs. Peder removed one of the springs. It had a C- 
shaped hook at both ends. The hook was just skinny enough. If Peder 
worked really carefully . .. 

He got two screws out, and pushed. There was room to slide through 
the gap. The sun wasn’t yet at zenith. When Peder reached the ground he 
looked around. Michiko bounded in circles, enjoying her freedom on an 
empty campus. She saw him and waved. Peder joined her. 

Above the drinking fountain where they converged, Hakim pounded on 
his loosened second-floor screen. “Wait! I’ll use my sheets to get down!” 

Michiko grabbed Peder’s hand, and tugged. She was small and slim. 
She barely came up to his shoulders, but there was no resisting her ener- 

Phillip C. Jennings 


130 


Asimov's 

gy. “We’ll see you in the wildlands!” she called triumphantly. “Come on! 
Come on! Let’s run before they see us!” 

They ran through evening, and the wind almost gave them wings. 
When it got dark on Gopo hill, they stopped and took off their clothes, 
and kissed and rubbed each other. They did more. At dawn they hurried 
past Persian Hole to the wildland trees where they could hide. They 
squeezed and did things that hurt. Some of them worked. 

Peder and Michiko made sounds of pain and joy. Afterward they lay 
among the leaves with their hearts pounding. They heard shouts. Olga 
and Sanjay and Hakim came running down the slopes of Gopo Hill, still 
far away, with institute staff behind them in their white uniforms. Sun 
sank and shadows rose. It got dark again, and not safe to run, but both 
pursued and pursuers ran anyway. ‘This way!” Michiko shouted. 

“Stop!” It was Doctor Moeller. They heard steps in the underbrush. 
“It’s me. Sanjay.” 

“Peder.” 

“I’ve got stones,” Michiko whispered. 

“When it gets light,” Peder told her. 

At dawn they threw rocks at the staff people. Nurses ducked and 
yelled. One of the Carmens grabbed Olga. 

Peder ran and jumped Carmen, using his size to knock her against a 
tree. Olga got free. The girl was exhausted, and tottered into the brush. 
Carmen flinched back from Peder’s kicks. “You can’t do this,” she said. 
Peder relented. “Leave us alone.” 

“You’ll get hungry. You don’t have food.” 

“No more orders,” Michiko said. “No more classes. We’re free.” 

“Think. Think what you’re doing!” Doctor Moeller said from a distance. 
She held a hand to her face. Blood leaked between her fingers. One of the 
rocks must have hit her. 

“We’ll think later. We’ve thought too much. It’s hard,” Hakim told her. 
“We want to be free. That’s all, jj*st free.” 

“I’ll stay with you,” Carmen said. “I’ll be your hostage. I’ll make sure 
you get food.” 

“Hostage? What’s that?” Peder asked. 

“It means you’re free, but I’m coming along.” She looked at Michiko. 
“Where are your clothes?” 

Michiko came up and tore Carmen’s uniform open. “You have to be like 
us. Come then. Three boys, three girls. I get first choice after I try out 
Hakim and Sanjay.” 

“You don’t have to do this, Carmen!” Doctor Moeller shouted. 

“Yes I do,” Carmen called back. ‘Things will settle down. We’ll reach a 
compromise.” 

“They’re out of control! We can’t track you by relay satellite. The buck- 
ylayer is opaque from space.” 

The Runaways 131 


February 1997 

“Get yourself to the clinic! I’ll be okay. I have faith in these kids. I’ve 
watched them my whole career,” Carmen said. She tugged at her torn 
suit, and stumbled away from the tree. 

Doctor Moeller’s wound gave some urgency to her retreat, and her staff 
withdrew in a confused clump, with lots of backward glances from Gopo 
Hill. 

Peder remembered the sculpture of Hidalgo. “Where’s Lago? Can we 
walk there?” he asked Carmen. “Are there fences?” 

“It’s in the southern hemisphere.” After so much shouting, Carmen’s 
voice was low and hoarse and resigned. “You won’t like it as much as you 
think. It’s winter there. The days at this latitude are twenty-one minutes 
long, with eight minute nights. Down south it’s the other way around.” 

“Winter?” Hakim asked. He seemed to be hunting an elusive memory. 
The word made him clutch himself. “Cold winter?” 

“No. Hidalgo isn’t big enough for temperature variations. It spins too 
fast.” 

“We can hide in the dark,” Olga said. “They’ll be mad. We hurt Doctor 
Moeller. They’ll try to punish us. Let’s go there. Let’s go south.” 

The sun set. One last band of light shrank toward the summit of Gopo 
Hill. It was gone. The darkness grew nearly total. Michiko grabbed 
Hakim and led him behind some saplings. Olga lay quietly, letting San- 
jay stroke her arms. After a time they embraced. 

Four of six people clung together. Peder sighed and looked at Carmen. 
Her black hair was tousled. She seemed new and different. 

Carmen spoke against his hopes. “It’s rape if you have sex with a 
woman against her will. That’s breaking the law.” 

“You look like Michiko and Olga,” Peder said. “Not much older. Is it the 
medicine? They took the medicine and now they want sex.” 

“You can’t go in a straight line, Peder. Straight from wanting sex, to do¬ 
ing the deed. You have to think—do I want a baby? If not, what should I 
do? Maybe the other person has a diserse I can catch from having sex.” 

“Do we have diseases?” Peder asked. 

“No.” 

“Do you want a baby?” 

Carmen thought. After a while, she smiled. “Peder, I’m too roughed up. 
I’ll be sore where you kicked me. Let’s wait.” 

“Michiko and Hakim are making sounds. Don’t worry,” Peder assured 
her from recent experience. “It doesn’t mean she’s in trouble.” 

“Thanks,” Carmen said dryly. 

Just before dawn, Olga started making sounds, too. Peder got up and 
walked away, inexplicably distressed, even if Olga was okay. He came 
back afterward. “Let’s go south.” 

The group hiked through the wildland forest, climbing the crater wall 
beyond Persian Hole. A fountain sprayed water into the air. The runoff 

Phillip C. Jennings 


132 


Asimov's 

became a creek. They drank and settled at the edge of the creek when it 
got dark. Michiko tugged at Sanjay. 

Sanjay shook his head. “No. I’m worn out.” 

“Hakim?” she asked. 

“I’m worn out too.” Hakim took a pair of rocks. He began tapping them 
together, beating out a rhythm. Sanjay joined in, slapping the water with 
a stick. Olga clapped. Peder beat sticks, and hummed in a loud drone. Af¬ 
ter a petulant minute Michiko joined in, dancing and pounding the 
ground. 

The syncopation grew complex. Carmen watched. At dawn they were 
done. “This medicine seems to have taken you beyond what’s normal,” 
she said. “That was pretty damned intricate toward the end.” 

“Beyond? Better than smart? You’re already smart,” Sanjay said. “If 
you took Cra 103, you’d be super!" 

“It doesn’t always work like you’d expect,” Carmen said. She shifted 
her gaze. “Drugs are designed for certain conditions. They don’t work 
predictably, used in new ways.” 

“What is it called?” Peder asked. “What are you doing? In your words 
you’re leading us away from a thought you don’t want us to think. Always 
before, you led us toward ideas, not away.” 

“It’s called evasion. There’s lots of ways to use words,” Carmen said. 
“There’s lying. If I said the sky was blue, that would be lying. I won’t lie, 
not to any of you. That’s my promise, but it doesn’t mean you’re ready for 
all the truth. There’s too much. Remember how tired you got of your 
lessons earlier this trift.” 

Hakim looked up. “We should be hiking. The sky is orange. Hazy or¬ 
ange, anyhow. Let’s use the light.” 

They kept hiking. A couple days after negotiating a difficult cliff, Ped¬ 
er and Olga made arrangements for after sundown. Michiko called in 
warning. “He’s too big. He’ll hurt you.” 

“You want Peder for yourself,” Olga responded. 

“No, it’s Sanjay’s turn.” 

“Sanjay hurt me.” 

“It won’t hurt after a few trifts,” Carmen said. “But you see how this 
can make people feel bad and have arguments? All this changing part¬ 
ners?” 

“Yeah. It’s just for now,” Michiko agreed. “Afterward we’ll choose hus¬ 
bands.” 

“Are you going to create a tribe? A little socio-cultural entity in the jun¬ 
gles of Hidalgo?” 

“That sounds good,” Peder said cheerfully. 

“Tribes feed themselves,” Carmen scoffed. She reached into a branch. 
“You guys don’t even know what these things are called, or if they’re edi¬ 
ble.” 


The Runaways 


133 


February 1997 


“What are they?” Peder asked. 

“They’re plums. Go ahead. You need something to eat, and if you hide 
from the institute, we can’t feed you.” 

The group ate. That night they had two trysts, with Hakim the odd 
man out. Three days later they reached the Equator. 

The fence ran out of sight in both directions. “How do we cross?” 

“Don’t you wish you’d kept your clothes?” Carmen asked. She seemed 
irritable. Perhaps it was the humidity. The sky was thick with moisture 
and loading for rain. “That’s barbed wire,” Carmen continued. “We make 
a practice of pasturing the food animals on the winter side of Hidalgo, 
and growing crops on the summer half.” 

“There must be a gate, then.” Olga said. “Or else we can use your 
clothes.” 

Michiko agreed. “Take them off and lay them over the wire. Are you 
different from us? Do you have something to hide?” 

Peder intervened before this turned into a fight. “Maybe the fence gate 
is close by.” 

Carmen sighed. “No. And I’ve got nothing to hide except the usual.” 

“We should have kept our clothes, though,” Peder agreed. “We made a 
mistake.” 

Carmen stripped and laid her tunic and skirt over the barbed wires. 
Peder crossed first, and held the wires down for the others. Carmen was 
last. She rescued her clothes, and rolled them into a bundle. “It’s too 
muggy to put them on. Even the wind doesn’t help. It’s going to rain in a 
day or two.” 

“Is it like a cycle?” Peder asked. “Like day and night?” 

“Yes. Very simple. Hidalgo is too small for chaotic weather. The air 
clouds up and rains every four-point-something trifts. It rains every¬ 
where.” 

“On Earth it’s different?” What Peder said was a question, though he 
was sure the answer was yes. He pressed on. “Did we all come from 
Earth?” 

“Watch out for cow pies. Sanjay—oh, too late. Yes, all humans came 
from Earth. I was born on Hidalgo, but I know more about Earth than I 
do about my own home. There’s just so much more to know.” 

Carmen sighed and continued. “Earth has population laws. For the 
next few generations, no parents may have more than one child. There 
are a few exceptions, but only for endangered tribes, not for top people. 
Not for the rich and powerful. Certainly not in the media democracies. 

“Having a smart kid is important, to carry on your name, and genes, 
and to be your proxy in the future. It’s a way of becoming immortal. Have 
I said enough for you to figure things out? Are you becoming that smart, 
or should I keep talking?” 

Michiko spoke. “If the people on top have kids, and their kids have 

134 Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 

something wrong with them, they’re stuck. But if they send their wrong 
kids to Hidalgo—” 

“Excellent!” Carmen said. “If the kids aren’t registered, and they’re 
sent to Hidalgo, those top people get a second chance. Mostly, though, the 
top people do what everyone else does. If they find something wrong with 
their baby before she’s born, they get an abortion. Otherwise, the insti¬ 
tute would be much bigger than it is. Your parents are the rare minority 
who couldn’t, or wouldn’t, take the abortion route. A minority of a minor¬ 
ity, but that doesn’t make you unimportant. These are important people, 
and they pay for your care. The institute couldn’t survive without that 
money.” 

“We have to understand this better,” Peder said. “Tell us about money, 
and about media democracies, and then explain this again. We need to 
know about ourselves.” 

“Money is a way of storing energy for building things and getting work 
done. It’s based on tokens and numbers. If I tell you about money, it’ll be 
just like class. You’ll have to learn to add and subtract, and divide and 
multiply. You’ll have to learn lots of things, but you don’t have paper or 
pencils, or books.” 

“Maybe we’ll go back to the institute,” Peder conceded. “Not yet, 
though. Let’s see Lake Lago first.” 

“What’s that?” Hakim asked. His voice quavered. He pointed ahead. 

Carmen squinted down the path. “Those are llamas. We have herds of 
llamas and cattle, sheep, antelope, flocks of turkeys, geese—even the 
geese are dangerous if you get too close. We let them live wild. That 
means they aren’t as respectful of humans as you might like.” 

“Oh.” 

“Will there be more herds by Lake Lago?” Michiko asked. Her dark 
eyes were focused on the monster shapes blocking the downslope. 

“That’s where they go to drink. It’ll be crowded,” Carmen said. 

Peder took resolve. He ran at the llamas, yelling and waving his arms. 
The animals moved away at a moderate pace. One of them turned, 
guarding their retreat. 

The group caught up to Peder. “They don’t want to fight,” he said, 
breathing hard. “Lake Lago will be big enough for all of us.” 

“It’s getting dark.” Olga sounded afraid. 

“We’ll rest by those trees. Then go to the lake.” 

“And then back across the fence,” Olga suggested. 

“I’m getting hungry,” Sanjay said. “Plums aren’t enough. Let’s go home 
to the institute.” 

Carmen smiled. “It’s not easy being free. You guys are learning fast.” 

The six sheltered under a copse of trees whose lower branches were 
eaten away, leaving plenty of headroom. The night was darker than in 
the northern hemisphere, dark and long, but Michiko and Olga were ner- 

The Runaways 135 


February 1997 


vous and lacked much relish for sex. Hakim worked on Olga, and then 
gave up. Only then did she change her mind. “Come behind here,” she 
whispered. The usual rhythms ensued until dawn, when Olga suddenly 
shrieked. 

Carmen lunged to her feet and circled the trees. “Damn,” she swore. 
“I’d almost nodded off. Shoo. Shoo. Go away.” 

A few meters away a half-dozen cows stared at the lovers with soft 
brown eyes. Carmen flapped at them with her tunic. Ignoring her objec¬ 
tions, the cows ambled after the whole group as they walked downslope 
and toward the lake. The haze thickened to fog. Not much was visible. 

Carmen spoke softly, as if she didn’t want to be overheard by bovine 
ears. “I wonder about the bull.” 

“How smart would cows be if they took Cra 103?” Peder asked. “They 
seem curious. They want to know things, but maybe they can’t. Their 
brains don’t hold ideas very well.” 

“Do any of you feel sleepy?” Carmen asked. She seemed uninterested 
in the intellectual capacity of cows. She yawned and stretched. “Am I the 
only one?” 

“What day is it?” Peder asked. “Bedtime is Day 42.” 

“It’s well past that,” Carmen said. “Past 50. This is a new trift.” 

“We can’t sleep. Everything’s exciting,” Michiko said. “Cows are even 
bigger than llamas. Look, here are some rocks.” 

The group armed themselves. The rocks brought back memories. 
“You’re the one who conked Doctor Moeller,” Hakim told Michiko. “If we 
go back to the institute, they won’t be so mad at the rest of us. Not like 
with you. We shouldn’t share your punishment. It wouldn’t be fair.” 

“Are you that hungry? You’d turn me in? You’d say you were sorry just 
for food?” Michiko asked. “What a shit! Olga can have you. I choose San- 
jay.” 

“Sanjay’s hungry too,” Hakim said. “I heard him say so.” 

The group reached a grassy bank. Slick mud lay beyond, trodden by 
hooves, lavished with manure, and puddled with water. They squished 
another two meters and reached the true waterline. The wind didn’t 
reach down to this low place, and Lake Lago was mirror-still. Cottony 
seeds floated on the surface. The fog was very dense. 

Carmen explained the buddy system. “Hold hands with your partner. 
Keep the others in sight. You guys can’t swim, so don’t go in above your 
waists.” 

She held her hand out to Peder, and they splashed for a time. She re¬ 
lented and let him give her a kiss. He embraced her and pressed into her 
breasts. The rains began, cleansing the lower atmosphere of fog. Lago 
seemed to grow wider. Its mirror surface broke into rain-lashed chaos. 

The brightening of the skies was deceptive and brief. The sun set. Sud¬ 
denly everything was dark. “Back to shore!” Carmen ordered. 

Phillip C. Jennings 


136 


Asimov's 


The six splashed in. Feeling blindly, they found each other. The cattle 
mooed and shuffled and snorted. Clearly they were close, and there were 
lots of them. The rains grew heavier. ‘This is a nightmare,” Carmen mut¬ 
tered. 

“We’ll go back. We’ve had enough freedom,” Peder whispered. 

“Do you understand then? You’re big in body, but you’re children until 
you know a lot more about Hidalgo.” 

“This is Year 8, right?” Peder asked. “Eight summers, eight winters. 
Each winter the animals switch from south to north.” 

“That’s right.” 

“So each winter does the institute switch from north to south?” Peder 
went on. 

‘Yes,” Carmen said. “There’s a winter campus. The layout is almost a 
duplicate of the summer campus.” 

“Classrooms there? Paper and pencils?” Peder bent closer. “Are you 
disappointed I had this thought? It means we might not have to go 
back.” 

“I don’t know if we’ll survive these next minutes. Something big is 
snorting out in the dark.” 

Peder straightened and cupped his hands around his mouth. “YAAAH- 
HH!” 

Instant panic. Shadows of black on black turned and climbed each oth¬ 
er, trying to get away. Sanjay and Hakim joined the shouting. Michiko 
threw rocks and managed a high ululation that was incredibly irritating, 
even to humans. Carmen grabbed her right and left neighbors, Peder 
and Olga. “Let’s step back into the water. Those beasts don’t know where 
they’re going.” 

The herd thundered off, crashing and bellowing. The rain ended sud¬ 
denly. The darkness lasted longer, and then the sun rose to the north in a 
deep red sky. The lake reflected the buckylayer like a mirror, bending 
over the horizon. Its south shores were lost beneath a distant ridge. 

The group left Lago and its trampled perimeters. Carmen identified a 
buggy trail of two parallel ruts, now overgrown. They took another four 
days to reach the institute’s southern campus. The buildings lay on a 
windy plateau that shelved from the side of a mountain. 

Carmen told them that the mountain was so high it pushed through 
the buckylayer and into vacuum. “Spaceships can land at the South Pole 
without entering Hidalgo’s atmosphere.” 

Carmen went to the utility building to power up the campus and open 
the water valves. When they entered the commissary, Peder let her make 
a radio call. One of her sisters spoke from the other end. Rachel talked of 
altered schedules and Doctor Moeller’s medical condition. “Guess where 
we’ve left food for you.” 

“Where we dropped our clothes?” Olga called over Carmen’s shoulder. 

The Runaways 137 


February 1997 


“You got it,” the voice answered. “We’ll fuel up the buggy and bring 
that stuff over. We’ll use the road, but it’ll take ten or twenty days. Mean¬ 
while, maybe somebody left emergency supplies in the cupboards. Stuff 
that keeps.” 

Carmen signed off. The group wandered behind the buffet tables and 
into the kitchen. Sugar. Popping corn. Spices. Chocolate syrup. A bottle 
of Krinos brand grape leaves. Catnip. 

“The cats went feral last year,” Carmen said. She yawned uncontrol¬ 
lably. “We haven’t seen them since. Let’s make some popcorn before I fall 
over. 

After popcorn Carmen tottered off to sleep in the bed in the nurse’s of¬ 
fice. Peder and the others went separate ways, to check if all the build¬ 
ings were open, and if the classrooms had teaching supplies. 

A few days later they assembled back in the commissary. “I’m not 
sleepy at all,” Michiko announced. 

“I laid down and tried to sleep, but it didn’t work,” Olga added. 

Peder rubbed his chin in thought. He felt the beginnings of a beard. “I 
think it’s the medicine. It’s something the medicine did to us, but they 
didn’t expect it. They didn’t expect us to run loose. They think it’s bad for 
us to have sex, but they didn’t do the right things to stop us. They didn’t 
expect us to want sex as much as we do.” 

“If they invented Cra 103, they know all about it,” Olga said. 

“I don’t think so.” Peder held up his hands against her protest. “Not if 
we’re the first people to take it. Somebody has to be the very first. That’s 

“What if this medicine does other things we don’t expect?” Sanjay 
asked. 

Olga went over to rub Hakim’s -shoulders. “We can watch ourselves, 
and be careful.” 

Michiko shook her head. “What if the medicine wears off, and we go 
back to like we were before?” She answered herself, stress rising in her 
voice. “We have to let them boss us, if that’s what they want. Anything, 
just to get more medicine.” 

“When the buggy comes, or when Carmen wakes up. We’ll tell them 
then,” Peder said. “We’ll tell them we’re sorry. We don’t want to be free 
anymore.” 

“We could use the radio like Carmen did,” Hakim suggested. “We could 
talk to them right now. I saw how she did it.” 

They trooped to the radio room, and Hakim got the radio working. 
“South station calling north. South station calling north.” 

Nothing happened. They fiddled with the dial and found static. At oth¬ 
er setplaces, the radio throbbed out noise. It sounded like pulsing en¬ 
gines. 

Olga reached a tentative finger, and pushed AUTOSEEK. The radio 

138 Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 


reverted to static, but the static didn’t obscure a voice. Someone with an 
odd accent talked about economic outlooks, evidence in a murder case, 
and the anniversary of an important NASPAC education loan bill. There 
was something about a Lunar lesbian spokeswoman seeking entry to 
UNETAO, and something about the Hidalgo question. More mudslides 
were expected following torrential rains in Nepal. 

The voice spoke on. 

“What’s the Hidalgo question?” Michiko wondered. 

“What’s all this noise?” Carmen stumbled into the room. 

“We’re sorry,” Peder said. ‘We were trying—■” 

“To listen to the news?” Carmen seemed surprised. “How would you 
know there’s such a thing as news?” 

“There’s a Hidalgo question,” Michiko persisted. “They were talking 
about it, but they didn’t say much.” 

“No.” Carmen sank into a chair. “No, they wouldn’t. One arrested soc¬ 
cer hero gets ten times the airplay. I’m surprised they mentioned us at 
all.” 

“We were trying to reach the institute,” Hakim said. “We wanted to 
apologize for running off and throwing stones and hurting Doctor 
Moeller.” 

We’re going to be good now,” Michiko said. 

Carmen looked at her. “Something’s happened.” 

“We don’t want to become stupid again,” Peder explained. “Maybe we 
need more medicine, or else that will happen.” 

“And in your simple honesty you want to make a deal.” Carmen smiled. 
“I feel lots better. Even a short nap makes a difference. I hope I wasn’t too 
grumpy toward the end of our trek.” 

“None of us can sleep,” Olga said. “I tried. We just can’t.” 

“It’s the Cra 103,” Carmen agreed. “It’s a side effect. Your brain cells 
are fuzzing out with new connections, and it’s too stimulating. Maybe af¬ 
ter they stop growing—do you understand? The growth is permanent. 
You’ll plateau and stay intelligent.” 

The group sighed in simultaneous relief. 

“It might be best for you to stay here, though. To keep you separate 
from the others.” 

“Can’t those other kids take Cra 103 and get smart?” Peder asked. 

Carmen reached and tousled his hair. ‘You’re generous! You even want 
smart cows! Are you happy then? Is it good to be smart?” 

‘Yes!” ‘Yes!” “It’s very good!” 

“What if I took this medicine?” Carmen asked. “Or maybe Doctor 
Moeller?” 

‘You said it might not work on people like you,” Peder answered. 

“We don’t know. We think it’ll work. It might be me who gets chosen. 
I’m one of triplets. It’s like having two spares. And Doctor Moeller is re- 

The Runaways 139 


February 1997 


covering from her injury. You heard the radio. She’s had stitches, and 
she’ll need dental repair.” 

“I’m sorry about the rock,” Michiko said. Her eyes grew wet. “It’s my 
fault.” 

Carmen patted her arm. “If I take the medicine, maybe I’ll get wild like 
you were at first. That makes me nervous. You guys used your new 
brains to get into a trap. Stampeding cattle could have killed you. That 
makes me nervous twice over.” 

“Why take medicine?” Peder asked. “You’re smart already.” 

Carmen sighed. “Hidalgo has problems. Half the settled asteroids use 
Higgs generators to gather dark matter. Having more gravity helps them 
collect air under their buckylayers, but they don’t like too much gravity. 
The colonists have adapted to light conditions. By Earth standards, the 
people on Ceres and Vesta and Iris are very weak. One gee would kill 
them.” 

She leaned back in her chair. “We’re different. Until our troubles be¬ 
gan, Earth leaders felt okay about sending kids here, because we have 
Earth normal gravity. To achieve that gravity, we became dark matter 
hogs. We started something that’s hard to stop. Dark matter keeps 
falling in of its own accord. It can’t all concentrate inside Hidalgo. It’s lay¬ 
ering outward in an invisible sphere that keeps growing and growing. It’s 
already ten thousand kilometers across. We’re starting to create anom¬ 
alies in the orbits of everyone else in the inner system.” 

“Anomalies? What’s that?” Peder asked. 

“Bad kinds of changes.” Carmen shook her head. “Here’s the deal. 
We’ve got to go into exile. We’ve got to pull Hidalgo far into the outer sys¬ 
tem. But then we won’t get more customers for the institute. We’ll be too 
far away. It takes a long time to fly from Earth to the innermost aster¬ 
oids. Then too, when we’re far from the sun, even our bucky-black albedo 
won’t keep Hidalgo warm and Earthlike. We’ll depend on solar mirrors 
in inner system orbits, and they can be sabotaged.” 

Carmen sat forward and sighed heavily. “We’ve got to move, but mov¬ 
ing will cripple our independence and put us out of business. We can’t fig¬ 
ure a way out of our trap. Maybe the best thing is to give all our kids Cra 
103, declare you cured, send you to other asteroids, and switch off our 
Higgs generator. That’s it, unless I think of something when I’m smarter 
than I am right now.” 

“We could go to Earth,” Peder suggested. 

“Immigration is forbidden. Immigration by kids whose parents went 
ahead and had seconds—you’d be put to sleep. It’s a gentle injection and 
a gentle euphemism. The fact is you’d be killed. Being on Earth makes 
you criminals.” 

“We’d be super strong on other asteroids,” Michiko said. 

Carmen agreed. ‘They’ll put you in quarantine until you adapt. It’s in 

140 Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 


the interests of public safety not to have bodybreakers on the loose. In ul¬ 
tra-low gravity one of two things will happen. You’ll waste down and be¬ 
come Ectos, just skin and bones. Or else you’ll put on masses of fat and 
become Endos. Either way you’ll live long unhealthy lives, with lots of 
medical intervention. Women don’t menstruate when they’re too thin or 
too fat. Sex can be difficult. Endo-Endo sex is often impossible. During 
your quarantine you’ll have your ovaries removed to save eggs for artifi¬ 
cial reproduction. Have I said enough?” 

“These are our only choices?” 

Peder spoke up. “What’s wrong with closing the institute? When every¬ 
body’s smart we won’t need it anymore. We could move Hidalgo, and 
make it a colony, and just—well, farm or something.” 

“Solar mirrors cost money,” Carmen said. “What can our colony pro¬ 
duce to earn money to position a few dozen mirrors, so we don’t freeze?” 

Peder looked at Carmen. “This problem is new to us, but it’s old to you. 
You and Doctor Moeller and all the others on the staff, you had this same 
talk. You wanted to find a way to make money. That’s why we’re here!” 

“What are you talking about?” Hakim demanded. 

Peder explained. “Now and again some medicine comes from Earth 
that the doctors don’t know about. They know how it’s supposed to work, 
but they need to try it on people. So which people ? Us! They test it on us, 
and you watch to see what happens.” 

“We don’t test every medicine that comes along,” Carmen said, looking 
from face to face. “We’re careful. Just medicines that promise good things 
for you. Now you’re smart, so that phase is over. Otherwise you’re right. 
You’ve been test subjects. That’s been your job for the last five hundred 
trifts. We got paid so much per head. Does this upset you?” 

“We’ve got to move to other asteroids and become Ectos or Endos. Or 
else we test medicines for money. Or freeze. Or go to Earth where they 
want to kill us,” Olga summarized. “You should take Cra 103. Get smart 
enough to give us more choices.” 

“It only seems fair,” Carmen agreed. 

“One thing,” Peder persisted. “Us being upset? Why did you sound wor¬ 
ried about that?” 

“You can guess,” Carmen said. “Certainly Earth’s upset. You have im¬ 
portant parents. We get money from them. We need more. We’ve needed 
more ever since business slacked off. We tried to be sneaky about the 
drug testing program, but some of those parents found out. From Earth’s 
view there are two Hidalgo problems. One; we’re getting too massive. 
Two; we’re being bad and victimizing innocent kids. Maybe we’re willing 
to do worse things to get money. It’s called survival, but on Earth it’s 
called blackmail.” 

“You aren’t bad,” Hakim said. 

“I’m glad you think so. Obviously we’re not perfect. There are ethicists 

The Runaways 141 


February 1997 

on Earth calling for a rescue fleet to get you. The radio talks about mus- 
terings and activated units. We’re actually supposed to be worried!” She 
shook her head. ‘They’re too damn cheap. For a fraction of the cost of a 
fleet, they could subsidize us and we wouldn’t have a problem. That’s all 
we ask for.” 

“Do we have guns?” Peder asked. “If they send a fleet we can fight 
them, like on those TV shows. We’re strong and we’re smart.” 

Carmen reached to pat his butt. “Better a lover than a fighter. No, our 
armory is small. Cattle prods, kitchen knives—laughable. Anyhow, we’d 
be outnumbered.” She stood up. “Come along, Peder. All this nude pes¬ 
simism is making me want to have' a baby. Let’s go back to the nurse’s of¬ 
fice.” 

Behind the locked door of the nurse’s office, Carmen and Peder bal¬ 
anced on a narrow hospital-style bed. Eight minutes of daylight winked 
by, and twenty-one minutes of night. Another day came and went. Peder 
spent himself and rolled off to recover his energies. Despite the popcorn, 
his stomach growled with hunger. 

Outside the window, a buggy puttered up to the commissary door. Car¬ 
men sat up and looked for her clothes. “Wash and go collect the others,” 
she told Peder. 

The group helped unload the buggy. Back in the kitchen, Rachel pro¬ 
vided an on-the-spot lesson in making hot porridge. ‘There’s been anoth¬ 
er final ultimatum from Earth,” she told Carmen. 

“I’ve told the kids everything,” Carmen answered. “I can’t believe they 
understand it all, but that’s okay. I don’t either. They make the right 
noises.” 

“Are they ready for schooling? Will they rebel again?” 

“Yes. No. We want to learn,” Peder told Rachel. ‘We want to help Hi¬ 
dalgo.” 

“Amazing,” Rachel said. “Quite a change from throwing rocks.” 

We’re sorry,” Michiko said. “It’s my fault.” Unexpectedly she started 
to cry. 

“Could we have clothes again?” Olga asked. 

“In less than a trift they’ve gone from preschool to late teens, in terms 
of the socialization of violence,” Carmen went on. She patted Michiko. 
‘They’ve volunteered to fight any Earth rescue force. I think they’d try, if 
we let them. Maybe even if we don’t.” 

“We could take Cra 103 twice, and get really smart,” Sanjay said. 
“Then we’d invent weapons like Doctor Zul-tar of Sky Force 9 on TV.” 

“Uh-huh,” Rachel said. “It’ll be interesting seeing you try to enjoy your 
favorite videos, now that your intelligence has gone up so much.” She 
turned. “Olga, I’ll fetch clothes next trip.” She turned back to Sanjay. “No 
more medicine. Too many neural connections and your brain might get 
wired solid. Signals might jump every direction at once.” 


142 


Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 


“If it’s dangerous for us, it’s dangerous for Carmen.” 

Rachel looked to Carmen. “You told them about that too? This crazy 
ambition of yours? Jesus!” 

To Peder, watching smart people argue was an education. Carmen an¬ 
swered: “I didn’t say I was going to take a dose, not unless it seems safe. 
But I’m not scared off by your ‘solid-brain’ metaphor. We’ve got a CD li¬ 
brary of every kind of neural problem known to humankind. Where do 
you see these solid brains? You’ve made them up.” 

“You call it invention,” Rachel said. “I call it extrapolation. In any case 
you promised to wait a hundred trifts. That’s minimum time for observ¬ 
ing these kids.” 

“Is Earth going to give us a hundred trifts?” Carmen asked. 

“Who knows? Their diplomats talk so carefully we can’t be sure of any¬ 
thing. All the fire they’ve breathed hasn’t burnt us yet.” Rachel looked at 
the group and lowered her voice. “Watch their eyes. They’re taking all 
this in. It’s such a change.” 

“Our parents might send spaceship-soldiers to rescue us,” Peder said. 
“You don’t want us to fight them, but we could talk to Earth on the radio. 
We could tell them you’ve made us smart. They should be happy about 
us. We’ll tell them you’re not bad people.” 

Carmen pondered. “This actually might be a good idea. We could put 
you on TV, so they’d know you were speaking your genuine thoughts. 
Rachel, what do you think?” 

“I think they haven’t plateaued yet,” Rachel said. She shivered. “It’s 
frightening, almost, Two trifts ago Peder couldn’t reliably dress him¬ 
self.” 

“Frightening?” Peder asked. “Oh, I see. Like with dark matter.” 

“How? Explain what you mean,” Carmen said. 

“You used this Higgs thing to start collecting dark matter inside Hi¬ 
dalgo, and now the dark matter collects itself.” 

“A runaway process,” Rachel agreed. “You’re saying you’ve got run¬ 
away intelligence.” 

“Isn’t that what you’re afraid of?” 

“I’m afraid it may go so far that—yes. Dark matter could ruin the in¬ 
ner system. Intelligence could ruin you as a human being, if we can’t 
teach you fast enough to keep up.” 

“We’ll have classes right after porridge,” Carmen said. “While Rachel 
goes north for clothes.” 

In reading class Hakim complained about the absurdities of English 
orthography. Sanjay agreed. “Even the language has bad logic. There’s 
ten times too many rules, and none of them work completely.” 

Carmen gave them Esperanto cassettes. “Try this, just for fun. It was a 
great idea, but it never caught on.” 

The Runaways 143 


February 1997 

They page-flipped through the first exercises. ‘This language is bona,” 
Hakim said. “Why didn’t people like it?” 

“Imagine you’re flying an airplane. You’ve got a radio headset on, but 
the plane is noisy, and you’re bumping through a storm. Someone down 
in the control tower is talking to you, trying to guide you. You can’t hear 
her very well. She’s using a verb: rapidas. Or is it rapidis? Or rapidos? 
Present, past and future tenses. In English it’s much more distinct. Am 
hurrying, hurried, will hurry. All the illogicalities of English make it easy 
to sort out what might have been said. In real life there’s static in all our 
headsets. When you’re used to English you escape that static.” 

“But if we were used to Esperanto, and if we fixed the endings, couldn’t 
we keep the beautiful logic?” 

Carmen sighed. “Since we’re so interested in logic, let’s switch to math. 
After a day or two let’s introduce some algebra.” 

Lunchday followed math. After lunch the six paired off in three direc¬ 
tions. 

Rachel returned to the south campus in her buggy, and found the com¬ 
missary empty. She went to the girls’ dorm. Michiko and Sanjay re¬ 
sponded to her shouts. Peder watched through the window blinds of a 
boys’ dorm bedroom. “She’s upset. She’s telling them not to have sex any¬ 
more,” he reported to Carmen. “She’s telling them about babies.” 

“Babies are a lot of trouble,” Carmen admitted. “Come along. Appar¬ 
ently my sister wants everybody to assemble out there.” 

The group assembled. Rachel handed out clothes. “Let’s check the herb 
garden,” she said. “We put up netting to keep the geese and turkeys 
away, and the bigger animals can’t climb over the fence. I want to teach 
you some practical food-lore. See, knowledge goes in all directions. Each 
of these herbs has a place in human history. Every plant was first dis¬ 
covered somewhere, or bred, and then carried off to new places. Now even 
to new worlds!” 

Rachel’s herb lesson introduced the group to places like Egypt, Greece 
and Persia, Central Asia, the Celebes Islands and Mexico. They went in¬ 
side and she handed out picture-story cassettes that talked about ice-age 
people and the first civilizations. Peder was amazed at how big Earth 
was, and how much history it had. 

Rachel agreed. “People devote lifetimes to studying just one little is¬ 
land, or a few generations of some medieval family.” 

Carmen bid goodbye to Rachel and took over the classroom. She 
opened a closet full of musical instruments. “Let’s see how fast you can 
learn notation,” she said. 

Peder glanced outside. Rachel emerged from the commissary carrying 
a hatchet. She strode toward a corner of the campus, boxing in a pair of 
retreating turkeys. 

“Blow.” Carmen handed Peder a worn plastic trumpet. He let out a 

144 Phillip C. Jennings 



Asimov's 


blat. He experimented with the finger-holes, developing a range of blats. 
Outside, he saw Rachel twirling a headless turkey by its feet, spraying 
rings of blood. The turkey kept flapping and pulled a leg free of her grip, 
even though it was dead. Rachel gave up and let it go, and it tumbled in 
the long campus grass. By the end of this short day, it was still making 
convulsive movements. 

Peder played his plastic horn through the night. Musical notation came 
easily. The group’s next lesson was anatomy. Then astronomy. Smelling 
of soap, Rachel came in and took over. “Thank God,” Carmen said. “I feel 
like they’re wringing me dry. Soon we’ll have to hand them over to the 
CD library and stand aside.” 

“You’ll find work to do in the commissary,” Rachel said. “I’ve killed a 
turkey for next trift.” 

Carmen left. Rachel taught sex education, and then sketched out the 
history of life on Earth; evolution, disaster, more evolution, more disas¬ 
ters. The accompanying movies were spectacular. Continents floating 
around! Dinosaurs! Comets! 

“Seven million years ago, some plants learned to extract a third again 
as much energy from sunlight as the others. We call these ‘carbon-4’ 
plants,” Rachel said. “They spread over the Earth. Their hunger sucked 
carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere and reduced the greenhouse effect. 
After a while Earth started having ice ages. The ice was hard on the old 
kind of forest vegetation, but carbon-4 grasses adapted, so for them this 
was a good disaster. Birds and mammals adapted too. Carbon-4 plants 
had more food value. Soon they were cropped so much that their advan¬ 
tages over the old forests were almost nullified. We humans are a prod¬ 
uct of this new environment of grass and ice ages.” 

Peder latched onto the phrase “a good disaster.” He raised his hand. 
“You say there are changes that hurt most things, and can’t be turned 
around, but a long time later we learn they were good.” 

Rachel nodded. “You’re correct in the abstract. Earth is going through 
disaster right now. Many varieties of life are becoming extinct. The loss is 
in front of our eyes. The eventual gain is something we can only guess at. 
This disaster is caused by too many people, so we’re responsible, but we 
don’t dare say we’re doing a good thing. We’re breaking down a system of 
life just to make more room for our favorite carbon-4 plants. That’s called 
hunger. For a while human hunger was a runaway monster. We’re still 
not sure Earth’s population laws can stop the destruction.” 

Peder caught Michiko’s eye. She nodded. She’d noticed too. Runaway 
processes led to disasters, but some disasters could be good. They’d get a 
chance to talk after supper, about the good of too much dark matter, and 
the good of too much intelligence. Peder raised his hand again. “We need 
to learn how to use the library.” 

Long after supper, and after Rachel and Carmen went to bed, the 

The Runaways 145 


February 1997 


group used their sleeping shift to study history, molecular biology and 
physics. Next trift the odors of roasting turkey drifted out of the commis¬ 
sary building. Around Day 25 their appetites drew Peder, Michiko, Olga, 
Sanjay, and Hakim from the library. 

They were waiting in line with their silverware and trays when sol¬ 
diers from Earth pushed in through the lunchroom door. Carmen and 
Rachel submitted to arrest and were brought from the kitchen to stand 
with the others. “Don’t attract attention,” Carmen whispered to Peder. 
“They think you’re mentally retarded. Maybe that’s useful.” 

Peder nodded. The soldiers handed out pressure suits the same blue- 
and-silver colors as the ones they wore, minus unit insignia, badges of 
rank and weapon packs. Peder didn’t have to feign stupidity after 
putting on the helmet. As for the rest of the suit, he let Carmen and 
Rachel dress him as they dressed the others. The two nurses whispered. 
“They’re going to de-activate the Higgs generator. Our atmosphere will 
expand. We’re not like the other asteroids. Our buckylayer isn’t heavy 
enough to keep the air dense. Without suits we’d die.” 

“Hidalgo is being shut down,” Peder said. 

“Yes. We’ll be taken to a light-gravity asteroid. Some of us will be put 
on trial.” 

After dressing their patients and themselves, the nurses were led to a 
separate room and locked in. Peder and the others sat at a table. A couple 
of soldiers eased into place nearby, apparently stationed to keep an eye 
on them. They could be expected to consider themselves more protectors 
than guards. 

Peder bent close to Michiko. “Their spaceship is on top of the south pole 
mountain. Hidden above the buckylayer.” 

“Maybe.” She passed him a lunchroom fork. ‘You’re strongest.” 

Peder hid it under his glove. “All those poor cows.” 

“If we don’t do anything, we won’t have our good disaster.” Michiko 
said. 

The sun rose to the north outside, visible in the lunchroom window. 
Moments later the window cracked. Air keened out. The fabric of their 
pressure suits ballooned. The sky darkened from orange through brown 
to black around the sun, and filled with stars. Most of the stars were 
crystals of snow. The snow was slow to fall. 

The soldiers stared at these sights with the rest of the group. In exultant 
terror Peder stepped toward the two men. Already Hidalgo’s gravity was 
less than normal, and he bumped into his targets. He used the clumsy col¬ 
lision to good purpose. Air hissed from the first soldier’s suit. The man 
doubled over and convulsed around the floor like Rachel’s dead turkey. 
Peder stabbed the second, digging tine-holes into the fabric of his suit. 

Olga ran to the locked door, and freed Carmen and Rachel. Peder and 
Michiko donned the dead soldiers’ weapons packs. They waved guns. 

Phillip C. Jennings 


146 


Asimov's 

“You’re going to play prisoners,” Michiko shrilled. “We’re leading you up 
the mountain.” 

“What?” In thin air nobody could hear well. Michiko acted out the mes¬ 
sage, gesturing again with her weapon. For all Carmen and Rachel might 
know, they were prisoners. Prisoners of a gang of uneducated lunatic ge¬ 
niuses. 

The seven exited the commissary and bounded uphill through snow- 
dusted grass that crumbled to the touch. Beyond the campus, the climb 
grew steep. More and more of Hidalgo grew visible. In one starlit night 
they reached altitudes beyond the peak of Gopo Hill. An oily line marked 
where the buckylayer had formed a ceiling above the sky for so many 
years. The rocks showed color below and gray sterility above—but now 
the buckylayer was kilometers higher and thinner, straining to hold Hi¬ 
dalgo’s depressurized atmosphere. 

With each step, the group leapt to new heights. Below to the right, they 
saw Lake Lago boiling into thin air, the base of a massive spouting plume 
of snow. On the far side of the equator, figures flashed into the sky like 
atoms of silver as they tried to head south to the ship. The patients of the 
institute were being “rescued,” but how could they cope with such unfa¬ 
miliar conditions? By now their weight must be less than one-tenth nor¬ 
mal, but that didn’t mean severely retarded kids in wheelchairs could be 
taught to walk. 

The forces of Earth had three places to go: north campus, south cam¬ 
pus, and the Higgs generator. The north campus was now the focus of 
everyone’s attention. Everyone except the guard stationed at the foot of 
the spaceship entry ramp. 

The group bounded into view. The guard pointed his gun, and raised 
his left hand to tap his helmet. At a loss, Peder tapped his helmet in an¬ 
swer. Michiko fired. The guard flew back violently. The group ran for the 
ramp, all but two. Carmen and Rachel twisted free of Sanjay’s grip, and 
backed away. 

Sanjay was last in through the ramp. Peder nodded, and they climbed 
the central shaft. One of the pilots fired down. Michiko returned fire at 
almost the same instant, and the man tumbled over the rail. 

Peder leapt in urgent hope of success and hurried toward a closing 
bulkhead. He thrust his blooded fork into the crack. On the far side, 
someone struggled to secure the door. In moments that person was out¬ 
numbered four to one. The bulkhead swung open. Michiko fired again. 

Her victim was a woman. Hakim and Olga pulled her body out of the 
way. “Go down and shut the ramp,” Peder shouted. “We’ve got to learn 
how to fly this thing.” 

This far toward the south pole, Hidalgo’s day was a brief gleam of light, 
followed by twenty-eight minutes of darkness. It took Peder an entire ex¬ 
tra-long night to figure out the sequence of events culminating in liftoff. 

The Runaways 147 


February 1997 

When one bank of controls turned out to be nothing more than a “master 
light control panel,” he decided the designers of Earth had gone out of 
their way to make piloting a spaceship daunting and complex. 

Restraining his temper, he set every complexity aside. In the end it 
was simple. You told Computer Display 1 what you wanted. Someone 
else told Computer Display 2 the same thing. That freed the control stick. 

Take-off! The spaceship shot up. It cut through the attenuated bucky- 
layer, a film of soot on top of the atmosphere, composed of giant hollow 
molecules. The film healed shut behind them, holding in a small world’s 
air. 

“Now all we have to learn to do is steer. Let’s get the ship pressurized 
first,” Peder said. “I want to take off this stupid helmet.” 

“Hurry. I’m hungry,” Michiko said. 

They pressurized, stripped off their pressure suits, and ate from ship’s 
stores, regretting Rachel’s lost turkey. 

Without a Higgs generator to concentrate it, Hidalgo’s dark matter had 
expanded to a sphere forty thousand kilometers in diameter. Their ship 
swam through invisible ghost-stuff. Peder knew there was no way to orbit 
the asteroid very long inside this sphere, not so the spaceship wouldn’t be 
dragged toward the center, but the opposing factor was that the sphere 
began dissipating around the edges. Left to its own, un-Higged dark mat¬ 
ter didn’t pack tightly. 

“Well, we can afford to fall for a while,” Peder decided. He canceled 
thrust and weathered the vertigo of zero gravity. “Now let’s learn to use 
the radio.” 

“I’ve got it figured out,” said Hakim. 

“That’s what you said the last time,” Michiko answered. 

Hakim flicked a switch. A voice filled the control room. “—to Queen 
Marguerite. Rendezvous South to Queen Marguerite. Please answer. 
Over.” 

“Are you talking to us?” Hakim asked. “We’ve got the spaceship. Is that 
its name? Queen Marguerite?” 

“Who the hell are you?” came the answer. “What’s going on? Why the 
radio blackout? We’re at Rendezvous South and waiting. We’ve got hun¬ 
gry kids here.” 

“Take them back to the institute,” Hakim said. ‘Turn on the Higgs gen¬ 
erator. There’s a lot of dead cows you can butcher for food.” After a pause 
he said “Over.” 

“That’s not on the program. Over.” 

Hakim grinned at Peder. “We control the program. We’ve got your 
spaceship. You’ve got no choice.” He remembering a line from Sky Force 
9. “We’re your worst nightmare. Do what we say. The longer you wait, 
the deader Hidalgo gets, and it’s going to take Earth a hundred trifts to 
send another ship.” 


148 


Phillip C. Jennings 


Asimov's 


“Trifts? That’s a local term. Are you locals?” ' 

Hakim made a gesture of disgust and switched off the radio. “I wonder 
if we’ve got a CD library on this ship,” he said. “We need to polish our ed¬ 
ucations.” 

“And all by ourselves. We can’t talk to Carmen and Rachel,” Michiko 
said. ‘They’ll tell us to stop being bad, and we won’t know. Is that really 
what they think, or are they being forced?” 

“We’re being bad,” Peder said. ‘We killed five people. We’re runaways. 
Like carbon-4 plants, we have to be bad first so we can be good later. But 
you’re right. Let’s stay off the radio. To have Carmen tell us she’s against 
us—that would hurt too much.” 

Half a trift later, Hidalgo’s buckylayer collapsed toward its former di¬ 
ameter, and grew darker as it thickened. ‘Things can start getting back 
to normal,” Peder said. 

‘They’re going to use a Higgs generator parked out past Jupiter to col¬ 
lect enough dark mass to tug Hidalgo into the outer system,” Olga said. 
“We’ve guessed that they’ve already started, and Hidalgo’s natural orbit 
will take it to the tugging place. Let’s go there. Anywhere else in the solar 
system, we’ll be arrested.” 

“They could lose us,” Peder said. “I’m not kidding. If we keep radio si¬ 
lence, and change course by increments, how will Earth keep track of us? 
Besides, they won’t expect us to go to the supermass.” 

‘We have supplies to feed the whole population of Hidalgo for a hun¬ 
dred trifts,” Sanjay said. “Fuel, too. And exercise equipment to keep sol¬ 
diers strong in zero gravity.” 

“We’re set then. Let’s go.” 

Peder’s group spent the next hundred fifty trifts in radio silence, 
studying the reference works in the Queen Marguerite's CD library, espe¬ 
cially the sections relevant to the planet Jupiter and orbital mechanics. 
After an initial period of intellectual triumph they grew bored, and in¬ 
vented new sex games. They returned to their computer displays to study 
oddball subjects like law, sewage treatment, chamber music, and reli¬ 
gious heresies of the European Reformation. They skipped workouts and 
drifted in Endo-and-Ecto directions, then rebuilt their muscles in fren¬ 
zies of exercise. 

They played computer games and wrote novels. The games were easi¬ 
er to score, and provoked fewer arguments. They developed a “perfect¬ 
ed” version of Esperanto. Hakim and Sanjay went on to create a perfect¬ 
ed version of the perfected version. Olga and Peder coined new slang 
words and idioms. Michiko and Sanjay talked to each other entirely in 
rhyme. 

Sanjay wrote a program to generate names for 237,677 prospective 
worlds, each not quite a thousandth the size of Earth, and therefore con¬ 
siderably bigger than the biggest asteroid. Of course, Jupiter was exces- 

The Runaways 149 


February 1997 


sively gassy, and lots of hydrogen would just plain dissipate when they 
started pulling it apart. 

Olga shook her head. “They’re too sonorous, your names. They sound 
too much alike.” She wrote her own program, biased in the direction of 
wicked consonant clusters. The group agreed to alternate Sanjay-names 
with Olga-names. 

“It all depends, of course, on whether we can get Earth to build 237,677 
Higgs generators and send them out,” Peder said. 

Michiko smiled. “We’re going to make an awful mess of the solar sys¬ 
tem, if all Jupiter’s mass isn’t confined into an orbital ring. Only dark 
matter can maintain a permanent necklace of pearls sharing the same 
path. Only Higgs generators can confine dark matter.” 

“We’ll be old before this project is over,” Peder said. “We’ll sacrifice our 
health. We may never set foot on real ground again.” He listened to an in¬ 
ner voice and spoke again. “Well, that’s some punishment for the bad 
things we’ve done.” 

The Higgs supermass loomed ahead, a patch of empty space to normal 
eyes, with a robot station in the middle. The Queen Marguerite dropped 
through, tangenting past the station, and out the other side. It slowed, 
stopped, and fell in reverse, less energetically. With each pendulum 
swing, Peder braked. After another trift they came to a stop. “Okay, 
we’re here. This is the biggest thing ever contrived by human hands, and 
we’re going to use it to make something even bigger.” 

Michiko ran out cables to take the robot station in tow. Hakim was des¬ 
ignated to do the talking. He composed himself in front of his microphone 
and began his broadcast. At the speed of light, hours had to pass before 
the people of Earth learned that the solar system was no longer theirs. • 


ARE YOU MOVING ? 


If you want your subscription to ASIMOV S to keep up with you. send 
both your old address and your new one (and the zip codes for both, 
please!) to our subscription department; 


ASIMOV'S SCIENCE FICTION 

HO. Itox 5130, Harlan, IA 51593 5130 


150 


Phillip C. Jennings 





NEXT ISSUE 


MARCH LEAD Inventive and pyrotechnic British writer Ian McDonald 
STORY takes us on a poignant voyage of discovery through a 

troubled future Ireland where you can't be certain of any¬ 
thing, even who you are, or who you were, in his haunt¬ 
ing tale of the consequences of going "After Kerry." 

BIG-NAME Hugo-winner Ben Bova joins forces with Rick Wilber to 

WRITERS, AND take us out to the Ball Game, and give us ringside seats 

THE BEST OF for a baseball game unlike any ever played before, as we 

THE NEW witness the epic confrontation of 'The Babe, the Iron Horse, 

and Mr. McGillicuddy"; new writer Kage Baker makes a 
wry and sprightly Asimov's debut, taking us back to Old 
California for a wild romp through history where one of 
the major ingredients in the thickening plot is an unusual 
"Noble Mold"; acclaimed British writer Brian Stableford, 
whose novella "Mortimer Gray's History of Death" was on 
this year's final Hugo ballot, takes us "Inside-Out" to some 
strange alternate realities that may turn out to be linked in 
some surprising—and dangerous—ways; William Sanders 
(who is a popular mystery novelist under a different name) 
makes a highly entertaining Asimov's debut in which he 
unravels one of the Mysteries of the Ages by settling who 
really wrote Shakespeare's plays ( Shakespeare , of course, 
dummy—what did you think?), and also details how, under 
other circumstances, some of them might have come out 
just a bit differently, in the madcap and inventive saga of 
"The Undiscovered"; Australian writer Stephen Dedman 
returns to give us a "Tour de Force" with a surprising sting 
in its tail; new writer Andy Duncan sends us to Hell on a 
very slow train, making his Asimov's debut with a scary yet 
evocative tour of the place called "Beluthahatchie"; and 
S.N. Dyer returns to show us that, ail those Psychic Hot 
Lines to the contrary, sometimes it's best not to know 
what's going to happen in the future, as she demon¬ 
strates in the hilarious story of "The Nostalgianauts." 

EXCITING Robert Silverberg's "Reflections" column gives us a few 

FEATURES intriguing "Glimpses of the Future"; plus Peter Heck with 

"On Books," and an array of cartoons, poems, letters, and 
other features. 

Look for our March issue on sale on your newsstands on 
January 21,1997, or subscribe today and be sure to miss 
none of the great stories we have coming up for you. 



IS 


Peter Heck 


FIRESTAR 

by Michael F. Flynn 
Tor, $27.95 (he) 

Michael Flynn’s Firestar begins 
with a prologue set on August 10, 
1972, in Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Mariesa'van Huyten, a wealthy 
young woman, is celebrating her 
last free summer before college. 
Mariesa’s boyfriend is about to 
make his move when she looks up 
in the sky and sees a large meteor 
flash by (astronomy buffs will al¬ 
ready have recognized this as an 
actual historical event). This inci¬ 
dent becomes the central fact of 
Mariesa’s life, convincing her that 
a full-scale space program is essen¬ 
tial for removing some part of 
Earth’s population from danger of 
cosmic annihilation. (This convic¬ 
tion becomes an obsession with 
her; it is an obsession I happen to 
share, but I am a mere SF review¬ 
er, not the heiress to uncounted 
millions.) As she comes into con¬ 
trol of the family business, she 
dedicates the resources of the fi¬ 
nancial empire to making her vi¬ 
sion a reality. 

The process is necessarily multi¬ 
pronged. She needs not just a few 
hot pilots, but materials, technolo¬ 
gy, trained workers, administra¬ 
tors, and freedom from interfer¬ 
ence, both from government and 
from private individuals who op¬ 


pose her program—some of them 
competitors, some of them anti¬ 
technology crusaders. Firestar fol¬ 
lows several of these branches. We 
see the recruitment of test pilots, 
and their assignment to an offshore 
launching facility—nominally run 
by Brazil. We see the takeover of a 
New Jersey public school by Men¬ 
tor, a Van Huy ten-owned corpora¬ 
tion that has the hidden agenda of 
training those who will create the 
new space age, a broad category 
that includes mechanics and sol¬ 
diers as well as future scientists 
and space cadets. Even one poet— 
a profoundly alienated but bril¬ 
liant young woman who begins her 
career under the name “Styx”—is 
part of Mariesa’s master plan. 

But of course there are compli¬ 
cations—this is the damned hu¬ 
man race we’re talking about, not 
some computer simulation—and 
therein lies all the fun of the nov¬ 
el. Mariesa meets Barry Fast, an 
English teacher at the school tak¬ 
en over by Mentor, and is taken by 
his lack of pretension and his con¬ 
cern for the students. Their rela¬ 
tionship gradually turns romantic. 
Mariesa’s mother Harriet, a very 
unpleasant person, staunchly op¬ 
poses the relationship—threaten¬ 
ing to use her proxies to undercut 
the space program if Mariesa con¬ 
tinues to see Fast. The test pilots 


152 



Asimov's 


(whose personalities cover a range 
from sheer cowboy to near-robot) 
play their own game of one-up¬ 
manship, with the ultimate prize 
being the first real flight of the 
new bird; in pursuit of that goal, 
anything goes. 

As for the Mentor students, 
they’re just kids—very ordinary, 
very real kids, despite the opportu¬ 
nity in front of them. Some of them 
follow the program blindly, some 
with an awareness (that doesn’t 
preclude acceptance) of being ma¬ 
nipulated; some rebel when they 
learn what’s been done to them; a 
few end up self-destructing despite 
the best efforts of Mentor. It’s al¬ 
most heartbreaking (though in¬ 
evitable in retrospect) when Styx 
turns against Mariesa—her poetry 
is so good that one is reluctant to 
believe that a mere science fiction 
writer created it all. 

The first-order goal of Mariesa’s 
plan is the development of a 
reusable SSTO vehicle; by the end 
of the book, she’s achieved that 
and more. There are now regular 
suborbital intercontinental flights, 
and her vehicle has proved itself to 
be a workhorse at delivering cargo 
to the space station. But she has 
not gotten any of this without pay¬ 
ing a heavy price. Her marriage 
appears at last to have fallen 
apart, thanks to Barry’s inability 
to break off his affair with a mar¬ 
ried colleague from school. Styx 
(who seems in many ways the best 
and brightest of all the Mentor stu¬ 
dents) has allied herself with an 
environmental activist who sees 
Mariesa as the enemy. And while 


Mariesa’s corporate rivals appear 
to have been squelched for the 
time being, they undoubtedly have 
many more resources to draw upon 
before the game is over. And it’s re¬ 
ally just begun; this book stands 
alone very effectively, and delivers 
a strong climax (although the last 
few chapters have to scramble a bit 
to get there), but it is only the first 
of a series following the develop¬ 
ment of this intriguing future his¬ 
tory. It will be very interesting to 
see where Flynn goes with his se¬ 
quels. 

“I laughed, I cried. . . .” It’s the 
oldest cliche in the book, and this 
time, for this reviewer, it’s true. I 
wanted to cheer at the end, and 
would have, if I’d thought the char¬ 
acters could have heard me. If you 
like large-scale hard SF with a big 
cast of characters and complex 
ideas, Firestar may be just your 
meat. Bravo, Mr. Flynn! 

WHITEOUT 

by Sage Walker 
Tor, $23.95 (he) 

Sage Walker’s first novel is also 
near-future in setting, and another 
example of the SF/thriller hybrid 
. that many authors are trying their 
hands at these days. In contrast to 
Flynn’s can-do vision of the future, 
her future is built on a pessimistic 
extrapolation of current trends: en¬ 
vironmental degradation, overpop¬ 
ulation, growth of mega-corpora- 
tions to challenge established 
governments. These are the origi¬ 
nal tropes of cyberpunk, but they 
have ripened into a language that 
can be employed in fiction with a 


On Books 


153 


February 1997 


much broader vision than the cy¬ 
berpunk label suggests. 

A prologue gives us a glimpse of 
some anonymous act of nautical 
sabotage involving someone named 
Tanaka, during foul weather in the 
Drake Passage at the southern tip 
of the Americas. A distant explo¬ 
sion barely seen through the night 
and storm sounds the keynote for 
much of what follows: terror and 
betrayal. Walker then jumps to 
New Mexico, where snow is falling 
around an old adobe house. There 
we meet Signy, one of the members 
of Edges—a consultant group, spe¬ 
cializing in the use of virtual reali¬ 
ty to change public opinion. The 
members of Edges think of each 
other more as family than as busi¬ 
ness partners, though their links 
to one another at any given time 
are as likely to be on-line as in per- 

Edges is in financial trouble, 
largely because Pilar, a dancer/per¬ 
formance artist who occupies the 
group’s Seattle home, has blown 
its cash reserves on an unsuccess¬ 
ful concert tour; when Signy chews 
her out for it, Pilar cuts the connec¬ 
tion and goes off somewhere to 
sulk. So when Paul, the group’s 
New Hampshire-based research 
specialist/legal expert calls with 
news that Edges has been offered a 
contract, Signy is ready to leap on 
it without asking questions. Only 
the reader hears alarm bells at the 
name of the prospective client: 
Tanaka. 

Tanaka wants Edges to help it to 
negotiate changes in an interna¬ 
tional treaty governing commercial 


exploitation of Antarctic resources. 
Tanaka is no fly-by-night; its busi¬ 
ness, harvesting Antarctic krill to 
feed the burgeoning Japanese pop¬ 
ulation, has a record of slow but 
steady growth for many years. And 
it wants the treaty altered to limit 
the harvest, which it fears is in 
danger of depletion from overfish¬ 
ing. This sort of project is a bit be¬ 
yond Edges’s normal problem¬ 
solving expertise; but on closer 
examination, it seems doable—per¬ 
haps even a little on the easy side. 

Edges goes to work, and we be¬ 
gin to see its members in greater 
depth. Janine lives in Seattle with 
Pilar; the two of them handle most 
of Edges’s creative output, and Ja¬ 
nine makes most of the in-person 
appearances. Signy is a neurobiol¬ 
ogist, founder of her own lab; Paul 
is old New England money, with a 
Harvard Law degree. Jared shares 
the New Mexico house with Signy; 
his background is in medicine. Dis¬ 
patched as an observer (and fill-in 
shipboard doctor) to one of the 
Tanaka Antarctic fleet, he arrives 
just as the ship recovers a drowned 
body. We learn for the first time 
that Tanaka has lost a ship, three 
days before—and that the compa¬ 
ny is making little effort to search 
for it. Nor does the ID discovered 
on the drowned man match any 
records Edges can locate—though 
readers may recognize his name 
from an earlier scene. 

From here, Walker effectively 
keeps the suspense up by jump-cut- 
ting between various viewpoints. 
This is an old technique, but one 
that seems especially effective deal- 


154 


Peter Heck 


Asimov's 


ing with a group entity (if not quite 
yet a group mind) like Edges. Jared 
appears on the verge of discovering 
something, then abruptly vanish¬ 
es—apparently lost overboard in 
the deadly Antarctic waters. In Lis¬ 
bon, where the international treaty 
conference is meeting, Tanaka 
makes a sudden change in its nego¬ 
tiating position just as Janine is 
geared up to apply Edges’s careful¬ 
ly prepared strategy. 

With the help of an outlaw hack¬ 
er named Whiteline (in part be¬ 
cause his price for a job includes 
enough cocaine to get him through 
it), Edges begins to discover that 
the opposition to their plans—and 
the person most likely responsible 
for Jared’s disappearance—is one 
of the potential heirs to the Tana¬ 
ka empire. 

The novel covers a world-span¬ 
ning geographical range in easy 
leaps, and its use of the Web to 
transfer information across the 
continents is smooth—and con¬ 
vincing. (We’re well past the point 
where the original cyberpunk writ¬ 
ers had to simply imagine what 
the Web would be like; Gibson had 
never owned a computer when he 
“invented” cyberspace, while most 
of today’s writers are regulars on 
one or more of the online services.) 
Walker’s use of multiple viewpoints 
gives us a look at a world not just 
from street-level, but from all sorts 
of angles—we get inside a working 
scientist’s head, a dancer’s, a doc¬ 
tor’s, a media consultant’s. This 
produces a richly detailed world— 
not necessarily a world one would 
want to visit, but one that the 

On Books 


reader is likely to remember. The 
Antarctic scenes, where the most 
physical parts of the thriller plot 
take place, are particularly well- 
portrayed. And Walker has a nice 
knack for keeping the suspense 
simmering by letting the reader 
see just enough more than the 
characters to worry about what 
happens next. 

A strong debut novel for Walker, 
showing a nice command of setting 
and of suspense plotting. 

ATTILA'S TREASURE 

by Stephan Grundy 
Bantam Spectra, $13.95 (tp) 

This big (550 pp.) historical fan¬ 
tasy is a follow-up to Grundy’s 
1995 Rhinegold, a retelling of the 
legend of Sigifrith (Grundy’s varia¬ 
tion of Siegfried, as the Germanic 
hero is most widely known). The 
new book is not in any normal 
sense a sequel; instead, Grundy 
takes a backward leap to the early 
life of Hagan, a Burgundian prince 
who appears in Sigifrith’s story as 
brother-in-law and as one of the 
main agents of Sigifrith’s death. So 
the events of this novel are parallel 
to those of Rhinegold, and explore 
a different part of the world of the 
early fifth century, when domina¬ 
tion of Europe began to fall out of 
the hands of Rome and into those 
of the barbarian tribes arriving 
from the east. 

Hagan is the youngest son of the 
Burgundian royal family, sent 
from their stronghold at Wurms to 
the camp of Attila the Hun, a pow¬ 
erful eastern rival to whom Hagan 
will become a foster son—and a 

155 


February 1997 


hostage for the Burgundians’ good 
behavior. At the same time, Ha¬ 
gan’s family sees his tenure with 
the Huns as a chance to renew 
their ties with their old ways; the 
Huns still live the warlike, no¬ 
madic life that the Burgundians 
have begun to forget as they live 
among peoples softened by the in¬ 
fluence of Rome and Christianity. 
They hope that Hagan’s military 
apprenticeship with the Huns will 
make him an effective commander 
of Burgundian troops upon his re¬ 
turn. At the same time, the aging 
Sinwist, or high priest, of the Bur¬ 
gundians sees Hagan as one of the 
few young men who has the poten¬ 
tial to carry on the pagan beliefs. 

A grim, humorless fourteen- 
year-old, Hagan is a firm upholder 
of the pagan worship of Wodans 
(Odin) in the face of inexorably 
spreading Christianity. So when 
he is assigned to share a house 
with Waldhari, a hostage from a 
Frankish Christian family, sparks 
fly between the two young men at 
first. But they soon find them¬ 
selves allied against the other 
youths of the camp, who suspect 
Hagan of witchcraft—a skill his 
mother is known to practice—and 
accuse him of using “women’s 
ways” to defeat them in combat 
training. (That hint carries consid¬ 
erable thematic weight as the plot 
progresses.) The other boys’ suspi¬ 
cion of Hagan increases as the 
Huns’ shaman pays special atten¬ 
tion to Hagan, which the young 
warrior returns with all due re¬ 
spect for the “eldest grandfather.” 

Grundy’s anthropological back- 

156 


ground gives his portraits of the 
society and religion of the Huns an 
unusual vividness; with not only 
Hagan, but two or three other 
characters from contrasting cul¬ 
tures as observers, we get a fine 
sense of what life in a Hunnish 
camp might have been like. In 
comparison to the grim, intensely 
focused Hagan, most of the Huns 
seem like good company indeed— 
especially the Hunnish women, 
whose earthy good humor, physical 
strength, and common sense make 
them far more attractive to Hagan 
(and probably to many readers) 
than any of the “western” women 
in the story. 

This is particularly clear upon 
the arrival of Hildegund, a timid 
young Gothic Christian hostage 
whom Attila announces his inten¬ 
tion to make his bride—and with 
whom Waldhari falls desperately 
in love. Therein lie all the seeds of 
the destruction that follows. The 
conflict between religions brings 
increasing tension to the plot, as 
Hagan begins to spend as much 
time as an apprentice to the 
shaman as he does in combat 
training; the Huns, who worship 
warlike gods, have no objection to 
such a dual calling, especially since 
Hagan quickly grows into one of 
the strongest warriors in the camp. 
But Hildegund will not bend in her 
devotion to her church, and when 
(upon her request) Attila allows a 
priest into the camp, her resis¬ 
tance is hardened—and her close¬ 
ness to Waldhari is made even 
more obvious. 

The plot builds slowly (perhaps 

Peter Heck 


Asimov's 


too slowly in spots) to several 
crises. Hagan’s conflicting loyal¬ 
ties—to Attila, to Waldhari (with 
whom he has become a blood broth¬ 
er), to Wodaijs, to the shaman, to 
his own family—place him at last 
in an untenable position, and the 
final catastrophe turns him into 
the grim, terribly scarred man who 
is capable, in Rhinegold, of bring¬ 
ing about the death of Sigifrith. 
And yet, by that point, Hagan is as 
surely a hero as any character in 
fiction. Grundy’s portrayal of his 
hero’s life and character, turning 
the villain^of one story into the 
tragic hero of another, is an im¬ 
pressive feat of character-building. 
Despite the slowish beginning with 
a dour young protagonist who 
seems to resist every opportunity 
to make himself likable, the book’s 
last half moves to its bloody 
catharsis with powerful momen¬ 
tum. Historical fantasy doesn’t get 
much better than this. 

ASSASSIN'S APPRENTICE & 

ROYAL ASSASSIN 

by Robin Hobb 

Bantam Spectra, each $12.95 (tp) 

Here’s a very enjoyable fantasy 
series—the first two books, at 
least—on the “young misfit coming 
of age theme.” Hobb is reportedly 
an established writer who has tak¬ 
en on a pseudonym on editorial re¬ 
quest—certainly this reads like the 
work of a seasoned professional, 
rather than of a newcomer. The 
setting is the Six Duchies, ruled for 
generations by the Farseer dy¬ 
nasty. Originally raiders from the 


Outislands, they found it conve¬ 
nient to settle the more temperate 
mainland. The first King, Taker, 
established the line, and the tradi¬ 
tion of allegorical names in the roy¬ 
al family. 

We learn this in a brief historical 
memoir written by the series’s 
first-person narrator, a royal bas¬ 
tard—son of Prince Chivalry, the 
heir apparent—whose mother was 
a commoner in a backwater town. 
After his father’s sudden abdica¬ 
tion, he is discovered and brought 
to the royal castle at Buckkeep. 
There, he is at first left to the care 
of Burrich, the royal master of 
hounds, hawks, and horses. For¬ 
mally addressed as “Fitz,” but 
known in the kitchens as “New- 
boy,” he lives above the stables and 
runs with the street urchins in the 
nearby town. Caught pilfering 
sausages by Burrich, Fitz acciden¬ 
tally reveals an ability to bond 
with animals and “share minds” 
with them—the so-called “Wit,” a 
magical talent treated by his soci¬ 
ety as an abomination. Burrich 
sternly admonishes him never 
again to use the Wit. Yet the ap¬ 
parently similar talent, the “Skill,” 
of sharing minds with human be¬ 
ings, is one of the most valuable in 
the land, at one time carefully cul¬ 
tivated by the royal family. 

Finally noticed by King Shrewd, 
Fitz moves to a room within the 
palace, where he begins to learn 
the intricate relationships of power 
and influence at work. He still vis¬ 
its Burrich, but his days are now 
taken up with lessons and drills; it 
has been decided that he will be 


On Books 


157 


February 1997 

made a useful part of the royal es¬ 
tablishment. Exactly what that 
part will be is revealed one night, 
when he awakes to find a strange 
man in his bedroom, and a previ¬ 
ously hidden stairway leading to a 
secret apartment within the keep. 
The newcomer is Chade, the royal 
assassin, and he has been assigned 
to instruct Fitz in the fine art of 
diplomatic murder. 

From this point on, Fitz’s life 
takes on some of the flavor of 
Kipling’s Kim, as we follow the 
bright young man immersed in 
learning all the lore of duplicity 
and disguise. Fitz is believed to 
have inherited the diplomatic 
skills for which his father was fa¬ 
mous, and Chade makes it clear 
that, properly construed, the as¬ 
sassin’s art consists as much in 
knowing when (and when not) to 
kill as in knowing how. Mean¬ 
while, Fitz is getting practical dai¬ 
ly lessons in court intrigue, as he 
watches his two uncles, princes 
Verity and Regal, and their retain¬ 
ers, play out the intricate game of 
waiting for King Shrewd to die. 
They are all jockeying to be in the 
best possible position thereafter. 

And from this point the series 
builds. Fitz goes on missions, first 
with Chade, then on his own, with 
broad instructions as to the de¬ 
sired results and the freedom to 
bring those results about according 
to his best judgment—whether or 
not he has to kill anyone. A rash of 
Outisland pirate raids, which leave 
the victims alive, but soulless and 
feral, sets off an unprecedented cri¬ 


sis. The only defense against the 
raiders appears to be a corps of 
trained users of the Skill; Fitz un¬ 
dertakes the training, at the hands 
of a sadistic martinet, with disas¬ 
trous results. Another near-disas¬ 
ter follows when he is sent to help 
seal a foreign alliance, and learns 
that the man he has been ordered 
to kill may be his nation’s best ally. 
Then, with the long-anticipated 
death of King Shrewd, the political 
situation falls apart. Increasingly, 
Fitz is in the middle of these devel¬ 
opments—and, more than once, he 
finds himself the target of assassi¬ 
nation attempts. 

At the same time, Fitz continues 
to be drawn to the use of the Wit. 
Burrich continues to warn him 
against it, but finally Fitz bonds— 
with great reluctance, at first— 
with an animal that represents his 
true alter ego: a wolf cub. This re¬ 
lationship becomes the central fo¬ 
cus of the second novel, as the two 
realize how they complement one 
another. At last Fitz has an ally 
who is a true equal, to whom hu¬ 
man pretensions and the intrigues 
of the court mean nothing. At the 
same time, as he has grown past 
adolescence, he has found himself 
falling in love, yet both his birth 
and his work keep coming between 
him and the women to whom he 
becomes attached. 

A complex growing-up story, 
with plenty of strong, uncliched 
supporting characters, and an in¬ 
terestingly drawn society. I’ll be 
waiting for the third installment of 
this excellent fantasy series. • 


158 


Peter Heck 


CLASSIFIED MHRKETPLflCE 


ASIMOV’S/ANALOG combination CLASSIFIED AD rate is $4.80 per word- 
payable in advance ($72.00 minimum). Capitalized words 600 per word addition¬ 
al. To be included in the next issue please send order and remittance to Diane 
Addison, Media People, 32 Shepard Road, PO Box 446, Norfolk, CT 06058 or 
call 1-800-542-5585 or fax to 860-542-6904. 


Conquer Spaoe - by mail. Free catalog. Flying 
Buffalo, Dept A Box 1467, Scottsdale, AZ 85252. 
http://www.flyingbuffalo.com 


WORLD ACUMEN SPACE SOCIETY 
W. A. S. S. 

Membership Ir 
the BEGINNING is nt 

Write: WASS 

POBOX 42126 
PORTLAND, OR 97242-0126 


YOU’LL 

MAKE 

MONEY 

SAVE MONEY TOO— 
BY READING 
and ANSWERING 
THESE 

CLASSIFIED ADS 


your 

I classified/ 

I display ad 
lean be placed 


WWW.SCIRARCHIVE.COM for science fiction 
fun: stories, games, lunar flea market, art, data¬ 
base, links, future tech. 


3 **, 


% 


I for details— 

I DIANE ADDISON 
I Media People, Inc. 

I 32 Shepard Road 
Norfolk, CT 06058 
(800) 542-5585 
(860) 542-5535 
Fax: (860) 542-1943 


Classified 


159 

















SF COHVENTIOHBL CALENDAR 


I n the holiday lull, our annual look at the new year. Plan now for social week¬ 
ends with your favorite SF authors, editors, artists, and fellow fans. For an ex¬ 
planation of cons, a sample of SF folksongs, and info on fanzines and clubs, 
and how to get a later, longer list of cons, send me an SASE (self-addressed, 
stamped #10 [business] envelope) at 13107B Autumn Wood Way, Fairfax VA 
22033. The hot line is (703) 449-1276. If a machine answers (with a list of the 
week's cons) leave a message and I’ll call back on my nickel. When writing cons, 
send an SASE. For free listings, tell me of your con 6 months out. Look for me at 
cons as Filthy Pierre, with a musical keyboard. — Erwin S. Strauss 



27-29—Stellar Occasion. For info, write: 3352 Broadway Blvd. #470, Garland TX 20167. Or phone: (214) 278- 
6850 (10 am to 10 pm, not collect). Con will be held in: Dallas TX (if city omitted, same as in address) at the 
Harvey Hotel. Guests will include: Walter (Chekov) Koenig. A Star Trek convention from the A-Kon folks. 



3-5—EveCon. (301) 292-5231. Holiday Inn Francis Scott Key Mall, Frederick MD." '97's 1st & friendliest con.' 
3-5—NecroCon. (614) 882-9812. Harley Hotel, Columbus OH. low-key relax-a-con. 


10-12—Arisla, 1 Kendall Sq. #322, Cambridge MA02139. Park Plaza, Boston MA. R. A. Salvatore, Bob Eggleton. 
17-19—ChattaCon, Box 23908, Chattanooga TN 37422. (404) 578-8461. Turtledove, Friesner, Kidd, Grant, Elliott. 
17-20—AnaConlsm, Box 21766, Denver CO 80221. (303) 426-1847. Sheraton Denver West, Lakewood CO. 
17-20—ConFurence, Box 1958, Garden Grove CA 92642. (714) 5304993. Buena Park (CA) Hotel. Furry fandom. 
24-26—ConFuslon, Box 8284, Ann Arbor Ml 48107. (313) 487-8743. Van Dyke Park Suite, Warren Ml. S. Delany. 

24- 27—SwanCon, Box 318, Nedlands WA 6009, Australia. Tradewinds Hotel, Fremantle Australia. H. Waldrop. 

25- 27—MedTrek, 6 Bellevue Rd„ Faulconbridge NSW 2776, Australia. (047) 515-740. Pride, Morley, Stathopoulos. 
31 -Feb. 2—HurriCon, 328 N. Eglln Pkwy., Ft. Walton Beach FL 32547. (904) 863-8810. Holiday Inn. G. Effinger. 
31 -Feb. 2—VldCon, Box 2076, Rlverview FL 33569. (813) 677-6347. Tampa FL. For multi-media zine fans. 


31-Feb. 2—UK Filk Con, 3 W. Shrubbery, Redland BS6 6SZ, UK. Rozel Hotel, Weston s. Mare. SF folksinging. 



7-9—VlsionCon, Box 1415, Springfield MO 65801. (417) 886-7219. Clarion Hotel. Comics, anime and gaming. 
14-16—Boskone, Box 809, Framingham MA 01701. (617) 625-2311. Sheraton Tara. John M. Ford, Ron Walotsky. 
14-16—Attitude, 14 Prlttlewell Sq., 1st floor, Southend-on-Sea SSI 1DW, UK. Abbey Hotel, Great Malvern. 
14-16—Gallifrey, Box 3021, N. Hollywood CA 91609. (818) 752-8378. Airtel, Van Nuys CA. John Levene. Dr. Who. 
14-16—RadCon, 2527 W. Kennewick Av. #162, Pasco WA 99336. (509) 9430713. Red Uon, Pasco WA F. M. Busby. 
20—Organla, B. Cesar Mota, Rua Cabralia 30 #501, Belo Horizonte MG 30240060, Brazil. (031) 225-2836. Star Trek. 
21 -23—JohnCon, HopSFA, OSA122 Merryman Hall, JHU, Baltimore MD 21218 (410) 2358659. Johns Hopkins Univ. 





Fifteen years of microelectronic 
research makes conventional 
antennas a thing of the past! 

This little box uses your home's electrical wiring 
to give non-subscribers, cable subscribers and 
satellite users better television reception! 


F ifteen years of microelectronics research 
has resulted in a remarkable device, th< 
Spectrum Universal Antenna/Tuner, 
that makes conventional antennas obsolete. 
Advanced technology. Imagine a ti 
sion picture so clear you'd swear you 
there...live. Plug the Spectrum Antenna into 
an outlet, plug your TV into the Spectrum 
and get ready for great reception! 

How it works. Broadcast TV signals are sent 
out from the local station. They interface with 
your home's AC power line system (a huge 




The Spectrum 


improve television 


aerial antenna ■ 
network of| 
wiring as large 
as your home itself) 
and the signal is sent 
to Spectrum's signal 
processing circuit. 

The signal is sep¬ 
arated into 12 of the 

best antenna configurations. These signals 
route themselves into 12 separate circuits. 
The Signal Switch control gathers 12 of the 
best antenna configu¬ 
rations. Use the Signal 
Search control to select 
from the best signal. 

The Fine Tuner circuit 
gives your TV crisp, 
clear reception. 

Try it risk-free. The 
Spectrum Universal 
Antenna/Tum 
with our risk-free trial and a 90-day manu¬ 
facturer's warranty. If you're not satisfied, re¬ 
turn it for a "No Questions Asked" refund. 
SPECIAL OFFER. For a limited time, get 
a special discount on additional units for 
great reception on all your TVs! 

Spectrum Antenna.$39 $4 s&H 

Additional antennas just.. . $34 ssh free 
Please mention promotional code 1492 -as- 1560. 
For fastest service, call toll-free 24 hours day 

800 - 992-2966 

M M sz m 

COMTRAD INDUSTRIES 

2820 Waterford Lake Dr.. Suite 102 Midlothian. VA 23113 


local 

• Cable user. 

• Non-cable 






















Select Styles Emporium 



The Ultrasonic Deterrent - The Dazer ™ 

The Dazer is a handheld dog deterrent. 

Utilizing safe, humane, ultrasound 
technology the Dazer is a must for 
joggers, bicyclists, the postman and 
especially kids and seniors. The Dazer 
works by producing a discomforting, but 
not harmful, high frequency sound 
audible only to dogs. Unlike Mace and 
other chemical deterrents there is no 
harm to the animal. It's compact, 
lightweight and features a belt clip for 
easy carrying. Shipped with a 9 volt 
battery. #2DE202 


($5.— S&H) 


Tabletop IONIZER Air Freshener - with Three Filters 



This revolutionary air cleaner uses 
four technologies to clean, 
deodorize and eliminate bacteria 
from the air. First, a High Density 
Carbon Prefilter traps odors and 
captures larger particles. Next the 
unique BioGerm™ filter eliminates 
germs, including staph and strep 
bacteria. Then a Hospital Grade 
HEPA Main Filter removes 99% of 
all airborne particles (0.3 microns 
or larger) while the 5 needle 
ionizer further reduces pollutants 
and freshens and revitalizes the 
air. Filters the volume of air in a 12' x 16’ room 3x per hour. 110 volts U L 
Listed #2DE909 $ 129 .~ ($11.sss&H) 


Call Toll Free: 
1 - 800 - 580-9445 

NJ Residents Add 6% Sales Tax 
Canadian Orders Add $6.00 


S3 #1 

n h 


To Order By Mail Send 
Check or Money Order To: 
Point to Point 
PO Box 2007 
Brick. NJ 08723 











