
 Fool's Assassin by Robin Hobb – a melancholic hero fights again | Fantasy books | The Guardian
 Skip to main contentSkip to navigation
 Killer instinct… Robin Hobb. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images
Killer instinct… Robin Hobb. Photograph: Ulf Andersen/Getty Images
 This article is more than 11 years old
Review
Fool's Assassin by Robin Hobb – a melancholic hero fights again
This article is more than 11 years old
This unexpected return to the adventures of FitzChivalry Farseer is modern fantasy at its irresistible best
The last that faithful readers saw of FitzChivalry Farseer, Robin Hobb's bastard prince, assassin and resolute melancholic, he was, he told us, "content". Freed from the political machinations of court, he appeared to be living out his days in bucolic bliss – but also to have lost the friend/soulmate he called Beloved, the enigmatic, charismatic Fool.
After six hefty books, it felt like a fitting ending to the story of one of modern fantasy's best creations. Hobb clearly thought so too; since she published Fool's Fate in 2003, she's written two other fantasy series. The Forest Mage books were intelligent and deep, but lacked the heart and page-turning spark of the Fitz books; the Rain Wild Chronicles felt flimsy in comparison. Now, in Fool's Assassin, she has made an unexpected return to the lives of Fitz and the Fool, and it's a delight.
Set in a medieval-esque world of castles and dragons, swords and rare, powerful magic, the Farseer and Tawny Man trilogies narrated, respectively, Fitz's fight to save the Farseer kingdom from internal and external threats, and the inscrutable Fool's use of Fitz as a weapon to fulfil his own opaque aims.
Today, Fitz, as ever our depressive, clever-but-obtuse narrator, is in his 40s, enjoying his "haven of rest and peace" in Withywoods. Hobb's assassin, trained in secret after being roughly dragged into the world of the royal Farseers as a child, hasn't killed anyone for a decade. "I was no longer an assassin, living to guard my king and carry out his quiet work. I was a respectable land-holder, a man of grapes and sheep now, a man of ploughs and shears, not knives and swords," he tells us, a little too firmly.
There are hints, though, that this man, once so key to the kingdom, hasn't quite given himself up to happiness. In his private study, he wonders, as enjoyably hopeless as ever, "Why did I come here, alone and sleepless, to dwell on tragedies and disasters that could never be undone … Why was it my duty to recall those I had lost, and mourn them still?" He reflects on the carving done years ago, of himself, the Fool and the wolf he bonded with; Nighteyes, his wolf, is dead, but the Fool has been silent for too long. "Almost 10 years since I'd last seen the Fool. And there it was, that stone-dropping-into-a-well plunge of my heart."
When a messenger comes to Withywoods, with an urgent request to see Fitz, he believes it can wait. When the messenger disappears, leaving blood on the floor, he is briefly spurred to action: "years and dignity and present social standing swept aside and erased … I loved this. The thought ambushed me and I almost stumbled. I loved this?" Nothing comes of his investigations, though, and life plods on.
Like its predecessors, Fool's Assassin isn't a quick starter. Hobb gives us months – years – of not much happening, other than plenty of premonitions of disaster ("Oh, the things we discover and the things we learn, much too late. Worse are the secrets that are not secrets, the sorrows we live with but do not admit to one another," says Fitz, woefully, at one point), and the introduction of a new narrator, before events begin to spiral out of control.
It is still impossible to resist. And when the seeds of doom Hobb sowed so near the start of the novel finally begin to sprout, when the life of contentment Fitz has built so carefully around himself starts to crumble in earnest, it is hard to know whether to read as fast as possible, to find out what happens, or to savour the pages, knowing this is the start of another trilogy and that the ending will leave you bereft.
Fantasy, never a genre it's been particularly hip to admit to loving, is enjoying a renaissance, thanks to George RR Martin and HBO's Game of Thrones. Hobb's Fitz novels are just as deserving, and indeed come laden with praise from Mr A Song of Ice and Fire himself. Start with Assassin's Apprentice, if you've not read them before; fans – this is a little slice of heaven. Because who wouldn't want to see how happily-ever-after played out for a creation such as FitzChivalry? Hint: not as well as might have been hoped. "I turned my collar up, pulled my damp cloak tighter around me and went back out into the storm," Fitz says, at one point. It seems to sum him up.
Explore more on these topicsFantasy books
Fiction
Politics books
Andrew Marr
reviews
Share
Reuse this content
Comments (…)
Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion
Most viewed
Most viewed
 