
ROBIN HOBB - Robin Hobb's Infrequent and Off Topic Blog
Robin Hobb's Infrequent and Off Topic Blog
Worldcon 2026 LAcon
September 1, 2026
Robin Hobb's Worldcon 2026 badge
Well, another Worldcon has come and gone. It wasn't an easy one for me. At 74, trotting from hotel to convention hall, back to other hotel for a panel there, then back to Convention Center is not easy. Heat the world up into the high 90's (Fahrenheit) and it's even trickier.
But I did it. And so did Kat, and we had moments of enjoyment and moments of frustration. As is always the case with any convention.
For those unfamiliar with Conventions, this was the World Science Fiction Convention. I think we had about 4600 people attending in person, and many others virtually there. All sorts of attendees, writers, editors, illustrators, readers and more readers. 
I'm not going to dwell on the panels I didn't enjoy. There were a few where opinionated moderators took over and I didn't get to hear much from the panelists. Others where one paneliest dominated and did not share time. That happens at every convention I've ever attended. So let's forgot those and I'll tell you the ones I enjoyed.
WEDNESDAY evening, Kat and I picked up our badges early to avoid long lines on Thursday. Quick, easy, well organized! A pleasure.
THURSDAY I was on a panel on Authorial Bias. It was about how, as writers, we have to rethink our assumptions and personal programming to write a good story. I thought it went well.
Then I went to Opening Ceremonies. It was in the Convention Center Arena. That put me off a bit. I had expected more like a ballroom and to me it felt like a high school gym with stadium seating. (Get over yourself, Hobb) I enjoyed that it was opened with an acknowledement of the Native American heritage of the area, including two songs. There were a few glitches with the 'slides' on the big screen but the staff of volunteers prevailed, and we were given a glimpse of all the good things to come at the convention. 
FRIDAY. This is when the convention really gets going. I had a list of 12 things I wanted to attend. And, as always, there were too many enticing panels and not enough time. My events began with an autograph session. As I was making my way to my next panel, I had a very brief hello/hug with George RR Martin. And that was the first and last I saw of him at the con. I went on to my panel on Science Versus Magic. I had a wonderful time. Any panel with Tim Powers on is fun panel, and again, sadly that was the only time I had with Tim. I didn't get to the panel I wanted to attend on Contracts, nor the one on the Business of Writing. Nor did I get to Low/No Budget Film. 
This is the unwritten laws of Conventions. The panels you really want to attend will always happen when you are meeting someone for lunch or on a panel yourself. 
In the evening, there was a dance. I had not been to a convention dance in literally decades! I went, briefly, and then met up with friends from my Writers Refuge local group also attending Worldcon, and friends of friends. So we adjourned to the main floor of the Hilton, where we attempted conversation until the general roar of people shouting to be heard over one another led me to flee back to my hotel room. Literally a barrage of sound that, sadly, I can no longer deal with. 
SATURDAY Kat and I got up early to have a breakfast with my cousin who lives near Anaheim. Then on to the Con! Kat and I did our presentation on Write Here, Right Now! It's a talk on how to make yourself start writing, no matter when or where you are in your life. It's one we've given in a variety of venues from 4th grade classrooms to a women's prison. We always pass out notebooks and enjoy meeting the up and coming writers.
My panels were Farming in Fantasy, where I learned a great deal from my fellow panelists and then Dragons, Friend or Foe. Sadly, my microphone would not work, so I just had to use the Mom Voice to be heard. It was really good to reconnect with Ryan Cahill if only briefly.
I fully intended to go to both the Masquerade and the dance that evening. Instead, we went for a walk to find food and found every restaurant just as crowded as the hotel ones. By the time we got in, ate and walked back, it was late and we were all tired. So, sadly, no masquerade for me. I went back to the Hilton thinking to connect with friends there. But again, the barrage of sound there from hundreds of conversations drove me away. My hearing just can't sort out conversation from that roar of sound. 
SUNDAY. Author Brandng for Introverts. I thought I had the room wrong, so I went to a different room, and then realized the first room was the correct one. So I was late. :( And that was my last panel of the conventions, as far as being a panelist. I attended a couple: Can we Enjoy the Art of Unethical People and Vampires in Romantasy. I enjoyed meeting and listening to Jay Kristoff. 
My most educational panel to attend that day was Digital Storage for Film. That was an eye-opener about saving any digital asset in this day and time. A lot of it was about film and some of it went over my head, but what I did understand was very enlightening. Listened to David Brin read and that was very enjoyable. 
Sunday evening was the Hugo Awards. I got dressed up and then . . . just ran out of energy. They were going to happen in the Arena, and I was tired and didn't want to go there and sit on bleachers. (There were chairs but somehow I always end up in the bleachers.) I watched from my hotel room. If I were Queen of the Hugo Awards with unlimited time and budget, I would arrange for them to happen starting at Noon on Saturday and cancel all other panels. The Hugos are important and they take about three hours. I'd like them to happen as the centerpiece of the Worldcon, with time afterward to congratulate winners and console losers and go out to dinner. BUT I am certain there is far more to arranging the Hugos than I know about, so that is not a criticism, just wistful thinking. 
Monday we had to rise very early and race to the airport for our flight home. 
So that was my Worldcon. 
I have a membership for World Fantasy Convention in Oakland in October. I'm thinking hard on that one. I fear I might be getting too old for the big conventions. Hm.
1 Comments
 Comments
Sep 02, 2026 2:52 PM PDT
I wonder if they will put any of it on Youtube. Some of the panels (and your reading!) sound very interesting. The only time I've been able to hear you speak in person was at an event with George RR Martin in London, back in in 2014 (now that was a grand hall!) and the Willful Princess and the Piebald Prince signing at Forbidden Planet.
PS - Btw, as a fellow introvert, with audio processing issues, who also can't stand it when people dominate conversations I feel very seen! 
-
Ortiga the Hobbling (aka Monica, the Nettle fan)
Post a comment
Worldcon 2026 LA Con Schedule
July 30, 2026
LA Con, World Con 2026 is upon us!
There is a tremendous amount of things to see and do there. The link to the webite is above. And it is your best source for all the wonderful things that will be happening there. It is also your best place to find out how to sign up for a Table Talk with a writer!! 
But, for people who want to meet up with me, this is the schedule. Can it change? Well, it's pretty solid now, but always double check when you get to the con.
Worldcon LA Hobb Schedule
Thursday, Aug 27
3 PM Authorial Bias in Worldbuilding 252AB ACC N
Friday Aug 28
10:30 Autographing Pedestrian Bridge ACCN
Noon Science Versus Magic 261 B
3 PM Write here, Right Now San Clemente
6 PM Table Talk Salinas (Hilton) * You Have To Sign Up For This. Limited seats at table.
Saturday Aug 29
1:30 Farming in Fantasy PalosVerde AB
4:30 Dragons: Friends or Foes 259 AB
Sunday Aug. 30
10:30 Author Branding for Introverts 254AB ACC N
1:30 Author reading 252 C ACC N
That's the skeleton of where I will be, but I hope to attend a lot of panels and randomly chat with many readers.
I hope to see you there!
2 Comments
 Comments
Aug 06, 2026 4:22 PM PDT
Will you be holding your writing event Wednesday august 26th or will you be gone to LA by then? Thank you
-
Mari D. 
Reply 
by
Robin
on
Aug 07, 2026 4:02 PM PDT
Hi Mari! I will miss that Wednesday, Friday and the Monday. But Oz will open the Writers Refuge on Wednesday and Friday, and Fred will unlock on the Monday. So please do feel free to come, sit and write.
Aug 14, 2026 3:47 PM PDT
It was wonderful seeing your panel and Wondercon and meeting you afterwards at the book signing - it was a real highlight of my year (and my mum was so excited that I got to meet you too! She's been a huge fan of yours for a long time and the reason I love your works too). So cool that you're visiting 2 conventions in SoCal in the same year. Hope to see you again at LA Con!
-
Mara 
Post a comment
Upcoming Events for Signing Books
June 17, 2026
An array of pens and markers suitable for autographing books
Refreshing the events updates.
First, coming up this Friday, June 19th (Juneteeth! Hurray!) I will be at the Lakewood Barnes and Noble store with Peter Orullian and Terry Brooks. Peter, Terry and I will be chatting about books and celebrating the launch of a new book, SONGS OF THE DEAD, co-written by Peter Orullian and Brandon Sanderson. We will get started at 6 PM. There will be an opportunity for questions and for getting your books signed. I hope to see lots of readers there. That B&N store is a really nice one. Come early and browse!
Then on Thursday,June 25th, I will be in Lehi Utah, at Lehi High School at 6 PM. Poppy Books is sponsoring the launch of Ryan Cahill's new book THE FALL. With Ryan and me will be Brandon Sandesron. This is a ticketed event, so you might want to act fast. For Tickets We will chat about fantasy, and afterwards, Ryan and I will sign books. Signed Brandon Sanderson books will also be available.
I hope to meet lots of readers! Plan now!
2 Comments
 Comments
Jun 29, 2026 9:27 PM PDT
Hi Robin! Any plans to come up to Seattle? My boyfriend is a huge fan and I’d love to bring him to meet you. 
-
Aayushma Shahi
Jul 01, 2026 8:25 PM PDT
Seconding the Seattle request!! Just finished Assassin's Apprentice last night and omg it was incredible!!!! 
-
Jacob Wolcott
Post a comment
1
2
3
4
5
…
Next
Loading…}
