Toward Figural Fantasy 
The Representation of Consciousness in Modern American 
Fantasy Literature 
Master’s Thesis 
Department of English, University of Helsinki 
Supervisors: Bo Pettersson, Mark Shackleton 
5 December 2006 
Timo Lagus
011535360 
Contents 
1. Introduction 1 
1.1. Aims and Methods 2 
1.2. Defining Modern Fantasy 6 
1.3. Fritz Leiber and George R. R. Martin 10 
1.4. The Inward Turn 15 
1.5. Note on Terminology 18 
2. From Authorial to Figural Perception 20 
2.1. Preliminaries: Consciousness and Focalization 20 
2.2. Story Space and Story Time 22 
2.2.1. Space 22 
2.2.2. Time 31 
2.3. Knowledge and Reflection 40 
2.3.1. Leiber 41 
2.3.2. Martin 55 
2.4. Conclusion 69 
2.5. Afterword: Emotion and Ideology 71 
3. Figural Language and V oice 73 
3.1. The Three Techniques 73 
3.2. Psychonarration 76 
3.3. Interior Monologue 85 
3.4. Free Indirect Discourse 90 
3.5. Narrative Discourse 99 
3.6. Conclusion 102 
4. The Inward Turn in Modern Fantasy 104 
4.1. Before the 1970s: The Modern Classics 105 
4.2. 1977: Brooks and Donaldson 111 
4.3. From the 1980s to the 2000s: Toward Figural Fantasy 116 
4.4. Conclusion 131 
5. Conclusion 134 
5.1. Leiber, Martin, and Modern American Fantasy 134 
5.2. Problems and Future Considerations 136 
References 139 
 
 i
1. INTRODUCTION 
Hisvin’s house had in its top floor a small room, the door and window shutters of which 
were all tightly barred from the inside so that a witness, if there could have been one, would 
have wondered how this barring had been acco mplished in such fashion as to leave the 
room empty. (Leiber, Swords 201) 
 
Will saw movement from the corner of his eye. Pale shapes gliding through the wood. He 
turned his head, glimpsed a white shadow in the darkness. Then it was gone. Branches 
stirred gently in the wind, scratching at one another with wooden fingers. Will opened his 
mouth to call down a warning, and the words seemed to freeze in his throat. Perhaps he was 
wrong. Perhaps it had only been a bird, a reflection on the snow, some trick of the 
moonlight. What had he seen, after all? (Martin 8) 
Fritz Leiber’s The Swords of Lankhmar  featuring Hisvin’s empty room was written in 
1968. George R. R. Martin completed A Game of Thrones in 1996. Even though the two 
passages are here divorced from their narrativ e contexts, it is obvious that 28 years is 
not the only difference between them. In the Le iber passage, the narrator presents the 
story world from a very privileged position.  Following a quick spatial transition from 
the house to the small room, th e narrator proceeds to observe  the room despite the fact 
that it is supposed to be empt y of observers (“a witness, if there could have been one”). 
Leiber’s narrator clearly has no misgivings  about going where his characters cannot 
follow and observing what his characters canno t perceive. Indeed, there is an entire 
second paragraph of description by the narrator before characters finally enter the empty 
room, and even then the narrator forgoes the internal perspective of a character, 
maintaining instead his position as an outside observer (Leiber, Swords 201−02). 
 In the extract from Martin, the narrativ e perspective has been narrowed down to 
what Will sees and hears and thinks. The ghostl y creatures are rendered in brief, almost 
impressionistic glimpses that reflect Will’ s vague perceptions (“Pale shapes gliding 
through the wood”, “a white sh adow in the dar kness”). Furthermore, the narrative 
empathically echoes Will’s refusal to accept what he saw or thought he saw (“Perhaps 
he was wrong. Perhaps it had only been a bird , a reflection on the snow, some trick of 
the moonlight.”). The last sentence is practically a direct verbalization of his thoughts. It 
is clearly Will’s rather than the narrator’s consciousness that orients the narrative. Apart 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2
from the third person reference, the narrat or seems to lack presence entirely. (The 
slightly poetic quality of Will’s perceptions could perhaps be attributed to the narrator 
rather than to Will himself, yet the overall perspective is clearly Will’s.) 
 The difference between the two passages t hus appears to be between the external 
and the internal, between omniscience and perspectivism, or, more specifically, between 
authorial narration and figural narration (i.e., character-mediated narration). As I will 
argue, this difference not only spans the two nove ls, but also describes a general shift in 
narrative technique that has gr adually taken place in modern American fantasy during 
the three decades separating Leiber and Martin. 
1.1. Aims and Methods 
What is remarkable about the academic study of  this shift in narrative technique is that 
there seems to be none. The withdrawal of th e authorial narrator and the emergence of 
subjectively mediated experience in modern  fantasy narratives seems to have gone 
unnoticed. Now, I do not mean to suggest that fantasy scholars have been idle. To be 
sure, much work has been done in the field. In addition to the many volumes dedicated 
to particular authors and works (mostly to J. R. R. Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings  
(1954−55)) there are quite a few studies with more generic ambitions. Many combine a 
historical perspective with attempts to defi ne the genre (e.g., Bria n Attebery, Michelle 
L. Eilers, Richard Mathews,  Michael Moorcock, Darko S uvin), but there are also 
largely historical approach es (e.g., Maxim Jakubowski, Brian Stableford), as well as 
more strictly ahistorical or formalist one s (e.g., Rosemary Jackson, Eric S. Rabkin, 
Roger C. Schlobin, Ann Swinfen, Tzvetan Todor ov, Marshall B. Tymn et al.). Finally, 
we have numerous encyclopedias and bibliographies (e.g., Fantasy Literature: A Core 
Collection and Reference Guide  (1979), Supernatural Fiction Writers: Fantasy and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3
Horror I & II  (1985), Fantasy Literature: A Reader’ s Guide (1990), Magill’ s Guide to 
Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature  (1996), The Encyclopedia of Fantasy  (1997), 
The Ultimate Encyclopedia of Fantasy:  The Definitive Illustrated Guide  (1998), The 
Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy  (2005)). There is even Gary 
K. Wolfe’s excellent Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy: A Glossary and 
Guide to Scholarship (1986). 
 However, as of yet nobody seems to have  commented on the fundamental shift in 
the way characters’ consciousness is represented and their experience narrated. Fantasy 
scholars may not have been idle, but neither ha ve they been entirely  in touch with their 
genre as far as its narrative techniques are concerned. I suspect sc holars have been so 
busy debating what makes modern fantasy a distinct and unique literature that they have 
had neither time nor inclina tion to study areas where mode rn fantasy overlaps with 
other genres. Narrative perspective and the representation of consciousness are clearly 
two such areas. But if the aim is to arri ve at a complete unde rstanding of modern 
fantasy as a literary genre, an aim that is at least implicit in most discussions, then all 
facets of narrative merit a critical look: both those where fantasy differs from other 
genres and those where it coincides with th em. How a story world is presented and how 
characters’ experience is mediated are fundamental aspects of narrative meaning-
making. Fantasy narratives are defined as much  by such aspects as by the fantastic. 
Furthermore, focusing on such shared aspects has the added advantage of introducing 
new theoretical tools and vocabulary into th e somewhat inbred field that is fantasy 
theory. 
 
My aim in this thesis is to show how modern  fantasy literature has shifted from classic 
omniscient narration toward a more intimate  and subjective mode of rendering fictional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4
minds: from authorial narration toward figural  narration. My analysis focuses primarily 
on a comparison between two novels, Leiber’s The Swords of Lankhmar  (1968) and 
Martin’s A Game of Thrones  (1996). I concentrate on narration, focalization, and the 
more closely textual techniques of ps ychonarration, interior monologue, and free 
indirect discourse. In conclusi on, I present a rough chronologi cal outline of the shift by 
reviewing sixteen further works that together span the last 70  years of modern fantasy. I 
summarize each work in terms of its use of the relevant narrative techniques, and follow 
up with a text excerpt that exemplifies this in a prototypical manner. 
 Even though this thesis covers only a small number of works from the two general 
categories of narrative involved in the shift,  and concentrates mainly on the two novels 
mentioned above, my audacious assumption is that the differences between them 
suggest a general movement in the modern fantasy genre. Leiber’s and Martin’s ways of 
doing things are, of course, particular to them as aut hors, but the overall tendency 
toward authorial narration in Leiber and toward  figural narration in Martin are, I claim, 
broadly representative of their times and environment. However, this does not mean that 
the authorial narrator has vanished from modern  fantasy. Nor does it mean that the shift 
is over, or that everybody will eventually fo llow suit. It is not as though all modern 
fantasy has started to employ figural narration. No t only is it difficult to draw a clear 
line between the two kinds of narration, but different authors employ them to different 
degrees. Nevertheless, the general tendenc ies are there. I obvi ously cannot hope to 
validate my assumption in this thesis, as it would require a survey spanning dozen upon 
dozens of works, but I mean to at least offer a preliminary analysis of the shift. 
 For theoretical concepts on narrative and narrative situations, I draw primarily on 
F. K. Stanzel’s A Theory of Narrative (1984) and Shlomith Rimmon-Kenan’s Narrative 
Fiction: Contemporary Poetics  (2003). Rimmon-Kenan’s book, together with Manfred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
                                                
Jahn’s superb web resource “Narratology: A Guide to the Theory of Narrative” (2005), 
serves as my primary source on focalization. Dorrit Cohn’s Transparent Minds: 
Narrative Modes for Presenting Consciousness in Fiction (1983) remains the best study 
on psychonarration, interior monologue and free indirect discourse in prose narratives, 
and I use it extensively. Monika Fludernik’s contributions to the study of free indirect 
discourse in The Fictions of Language and the Languages of Fiction  (1993) also prove 
useful. While these are my main sources for the analytical sections, I use other critical 
and theoretical texts as necessary. 
 For those sections that touch on the ge nre of modern fantasy and the literary 
history relevant to the shift in technique, I use a variety of sources, none of which really 
stands out as more important than the others. However, The Encyclopedia of Fantasy  
and The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction  (1993) have proven to be eminently useful 
general resources, and thus deserve to be mentioned here. 
 Finally, it should be noted that the fo llowing discussion concerns heterodiegetic 1 
modern fantasy narratives only. This is for the simple reason that only heterodiegetic 
narrators can freely choose which character’s consciousness to render, in what way, and 
for how long. Only heterodiegetic narrators can span the divide between authorial and 
figural narration, and thus onl y heterodiegetic narratives can be subject to shifts 
between the two. Furthermore, the presen t thesis focuses primarily on American 
heterodiegetic fantasy. I do, however, believ e that the shift hypothesis is equally valid 
for modern British fantasy literature, for example. 
 
 
 
1 In a heterodiegetic narrative, the narrator is not a character in the story but instead occupies a level 
that is ontologically above or outside the represented events (see Jahn N1.10.; Rimmon-Kenan 96). In 
a homodiegetic narrative, the narrator is also a character in the story (see ibid.). Heterodiegetic 
narratives are traditionally known as third person narratives, homodiegetic narratives as first person 
narratives. This latter distinction, however, has proven problematic (see Bal 22; Jahn N1.10.). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
1.2. Defining Modern Fantasy 
Fantasy is a notoriously elusive genre. There is no critical consensus over the definition 
of fantasy nor is there agreement about th e body of works the term should cover (see 
Eilers 317− 18; Fantasy 337; Wolfe, Terms xiii, 38). Most fantasy scholars seem to 
acknowledge this. In fact, it is common practice to open with the above disclaimer 
before moving on to one’s own definition. Pe rhaps the only point that scholars agree 
upon is that fantasy literature deals with the impossible (or marvellous or fantastic or 
supernatural or extranatural or nonrational or irreal or whatever one chooses to call this 
nebulous quality). Gary K. Wolfe’s minimal dictionary definition accordingly reads: “A 
fictional narrative describing events that the reader believes to be Impossible” ( Terms 
38). However, as Wolfe himself observes, not only is the term impossible imprecise, but 
the definition itself is hopelessly broad (ibid.) . As it stands, it can be argued to include 
such genres as science fiction and horror (ibid.). Moreover, what the reader conceives as 
impossible depends, of course, on his or her historical and cultural environment (see 
Wolfe, “Encounter” 2−3). Wolfe’s own solution is to expand the notion of impossibility 
in fantasy into an elaborate and somewh at obscure system of deeper meanings, 
ideational structures, affectiv e and cognitive significances, and levels of belief (see 
Wolfe, “Encounter”). Wolfe is able to spec ify what he means by the impossible, but 
whether his scheme actually captures what fantasy literature is all about remains 
questionable. 
 However, the impossible is inescapable. C. N. Manlove, for example, mixes the 
impossible with the wondrous when he describes fantasy as a “fiction evoking wonder 
and containing a substantial and irreducible element of supernatural or impossible 
worlds, beings or objects with which the mort al characters in the story or the readers 
become on at least partly familiar terms” (16 −17). Ann Swinfen draws on Todorovian 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
vocabulary for her definition: “The essential ingredient of all fantasy is ‘the 
marvellous’, which will be regarded as  anything outside the normal space-time 
continuum of the everyday world” (5). Fo r Marshall B. Tymn et al., fantasy is 
“composed of works in which nonrational pheno mena play a significant part. That is, 
they are works in which events occur, or pl aces or creatures exist, that could not occur 
or exist according to rational st andards or scientific explanations” (3). Jules Zanger sets 
fantasy against realism and na turalism, and views it as “d efined by those aspects of 
reality it denies, by representations that ar e not merely improbabl e or untrue, as are 
common to all fictions, but patently fals e” (226). Similarly, Eric S. Rabkin posits 
“Fantasy” as the polar opposite of “Reality” (227), and describes fantasy as a genre 
whose defining characteristic is a continuous and “direct re versal of the ground rules of 
a narrative world” (213, see 37). Finally, there is The Encyclopedia of Fantasy  with yet 
another definition that draws on the impossibl e: “A fantasy text is a self-coherent 
narrative. When set in this world, it tells a story which is impossible in the world as we 
perceive it . . . when set in an otherworld, that otherworld will be impossible, though 
stories set there may be possible in its terms” (338). 
 One consequence of such an exclusiv e focus on the impossible is that much 
fantasy scholarship is founded on a romantic celebration and idealization of wonder and 
imagination (e.g., Attebery, Manlove, Math ews, Swinfen, Tolkien, Wolfe). Tolkien 
provides perhaps the best example of this wh en he describes fantas y literature and its 
ability to evoke strangeness and wonder as “a higher form of Art, indeed the most nearly 
pure form, and so (when achieved) the mo st potent” (“Fairy-Stories” 45). The 
impossible emerges as a value in itself, and such imagination as produces and explores 
the impossible is seen to repres ent the highest form of creativ ity. This is especially true 
for studies that seek to defend fantasy (since such studies are typically more eager to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8
                                                
distinguish fantasy as distinct and unique). Moreover, the celebration of the impossible 
usually involves a diametric opposition betw een fantasy on the one hand, and realism 
and naturalism (or simply mainstream lite rature) on the other. This is somewhat 
puzzling since the same studies that celebrate  the impossible often argue that fantasy is 
rather a reflection on the real than a departure from it. 
 The above approach is not only unwarra nted but untenable. For one, celebrating 
fantasy as the high point of creativity eff ectively sidelines all other genres. Can we 
really say that realistic stories, for example,  require less imagination in the telling than 
fantastic ones? Is the impossible truly a mo re difficult subject creatively than the 
mundane? Even more unfortunate is that th is foregrounding of the impossible seems to 
narrow fantasy down to only one feature. Th e impossible is surely the feature that 
distinguishes fantasy from other genres, but it does not describe the breadth and depth 
of fantasy. It makes no mention of realisti c characterization, huma n drama, beautifully 
balanced prose, skillfully spun free indirect discourse, or even gripping storytelling. 
 Finally, the classic opposition between fantasy and realism is misleading. It 
obscures the fact that even though fantasy narratives contain story worlds and story 
world elements that have little basis in ev eryday life, they neve rtheless draw on the 
same literary conventions of realism as other modern novels. 2 Michelle L. Eilers’s 
insight into the origins of modern fantasy is particularly valuable here: “One of the most 
significant features uniting the earliest mode rn fantasies is their employment of the 
narrative convention literary realism . . . . the first writers of  modern fantasy manifested 
a modern emphasis on the individual by developing original plots, pa rticular characters, 
 
 
 
2 By “realism”, I mean the general aim to believably portray individual human experience. As such, 
“realism” makes no distinction between classic Realism and the psychological realism of the 
twentieth-century novel, for example. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9
                                                
and particular settings” (335, se e 329). So, rather than glor ify fantasy into a literary 
ghetto by celebrating the impossible, we should come up with a more inclusive 
approach rooted in a larger claim on the real. 
 For my present purposes, I shall use a slightly extended version of Eilers’s 
definition, and describe m odern fantasy broadly as a prose fiction genre composed of 
stories in which a magical or supernatural  power typically play s a fundamental role, 
that are set either in a fantastically transformed version of our world or in an internally 
coherent otherworld, and that aim to create an illusion of reality .3 Otherworld is here 
understood to mean any autonomous story reality that is not a repres entation of the real 
world (e.g., Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea, Tolkien’s Middle-Earth). An internally 
coherent otherworld is governed by logically cons istent rules as opposed to arbitrary or 
nonsensical ones (see Fantasy 738, 847; Swinfen 3, 75 −99; Tolkien, “Fairy-Stories” 
46). The illusion of reality is achieved by focu sing on particular human experience in a 
particular setting (Eilers’s “o riginal plots, particular char acters, particular settings” 
(329)). The internal coherence principle clearly works well with this aim. 
 In discussing the shift from authorial to  figural narration, I make no distinctions 
between the various subgenres of modern fa ntasy. By and large,  narrative perspective 
and the representation of consciousness bel ong to a level of narrative meaning-making 
that transcends the particularities of subge neric differences in modern fantasy. As a 
genre, modern fantasy does not experiment  with psychological realism, nor does it aim 
to reinvent consciousness as portrayed in prose fiction. Rather, it draws on the same 
pool of common novelistic techniques as othe r forms of popular literature. I find no 
 
 
 
3 Eilers’s original definition of modern fantasy reads: “a post-Enlightenment prose fiction genre 
composed of narratives in which an extranatural power plays a fundamental role and that aim to create 
an illusion of reality” (318, see 33 6). I added the story world clau se because I find the notion of 
internally coherent worlds tantamount to the nature of modern fantasy (see Fantasy 338−39). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
reason to assume that any one subgenre of m odern fantasy differs substantially from the 
rest in terms of renderi ng consciousness (save perhaps children’s and young adult 
fantasy). 
 Finally, it should be noted that fantasy and modern fantasy  are here used 
interchangeably. Both refer to fantasy literat ure produced after the tu rn of the twentieth 
century. Even though the roots of modern fantas y date at least as far back as the early 
1800s (see Eilers 318; Wolfe, Terms 74), it is not until the twentieth century that 
fantastic otherworlds lose “the essential fr agility of mere dreams”  (Stableford, “Baum” 
125), and achieve the kind of autonomy and coherence that my definition of modern 
fantasy entails. 
1.3. Fritz Leiber and George R. R. Martin 
In choosing two representative fantasy novels th at would allow me to chart, or at least 
suggest, the development from authorial narr ation to figural narration, I was primarily 
concerned with two criteria. First, the two novels needed to belong to the mainstream of 
modern American fantasy literature. In other words, they needed to be broadly 
representative of their times. A mainstream na rrative is, after all, more likely to reflect 
prototypical patterns of narration than a generically marginal one. Second, the novels 
needed to be popular and important works by popular and important authors. Popularity 
translates into influence, which, in tur n, amounts to the dissemination of style and 
technique through imitators. I was therefor e looking for novels that were not only 
mainstream, but that were also important  enough to have left  their mark on the 
mainstream. Leiber’s The Swords of Lankhmar and Martin’s A Game of Thrones are two 
such novels, especially in the context of th e series that spawned them: the Fafhrd and 
the Gray Mouser (F&GM) stories (1939−88), and A Song of Ice and Fire cycle (1996−), 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11
                                                
respectively. It is a happy coincidence that both Leiber and Martin, in addition to being 
major authors, are also original writers who draw on a deep familiarity with the tradition 
of modern fantasy and with the art of writing in general. 
 Fritz Leiber (1910 −92) is considered to be one of the most important and 
influential fantasy authors of the twentieth century ( Fantasy 573; Stableford, “Leiber” 
933, 935). He was particularly instrumental in the development of Sword and Sorcery 4 
stories, a major subgenre of modern fantas y pioneered by Robert E. Howard in the 
1920s and 1930s (Fantasy 915; Jakubowski 225; Science 1194−95; Stableford, “Baum” 
130; Stableford, “Leiber” 933, 935). Next to Howard’s Conan the Cimmerian, and 
Michael Moorcock’s Elric of Melniboné, Le iber’s Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser are 
probably the best-known and best-loved characters in the Sword and Sorcery arena. The 
F&GM stories were written over a span of r oughly 50 years, from the 1930s to the late 
1980s, and cover nearly Leiber ’s entire career as a professional writer (see Jakubowski 
225; Stableford, “Leiber” 935). 
 Leiber’s greatest contribution to fantasy was his introduction of characters that are 
more human than superhuman, ordinary ra ther than extraordinary (Jakubowski 225; 
Stableford, “Leiber” 938). As Brian Stableford  argues, “Leiber is . . . at his best when 
dealing with ordinary characters whose weaknesses are more obvious than their 
strengths. One of the great virtues of his heroic fantasy is that he succeeds where the 
vast majority of writers in the genre fail: he  gives his heroes a true human dimension” 
(“Leiber” 938). Leiber’s own commentary  on his two heroes rephrases the same 
argument in more earthy tones: “Fafhrd and the Mouser are rogues through and through, 
 
 
 
4 Sword and Sorcery is usually synonymous with Heroic Fantasy. Some prefer the latter term as it is 
supposedly more formal and less campy or derogatory than the former (see Fantasy 464; Wolfe, 
“Terms” 52, 128; cf. Science 561−62). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
though each has in him a lot of humanity and at least a diamond chip of the spirit of true 
adventure. They drink, they feast, they wenc h, they brawl, they steal, they gamble, and 
surely they hire out their swords to powers that are only a sh ade better, if that, than the 
villains” (“Note” 3). While much the same could be said of Conan, for example, Fafhrd 
and the Mouser, unlike their barbarian pred ecessor, are not supermen. Their distance 
from the classic fairy tale hero of many vi rtues and few flaws is therefore even more 
pronounced, as Leiber himself is quick to note with reference to Tolkien (ibid.). Fafhrd 
and the Mouser thus prefigure the more human hero that has since entered the 
mainstream of modern-day fantasy (e.g., through Martin). 
 In addition to fantasy in general, and Sw ord and Sorcery in pa rticular, Leiber is 
also a respected author of science fiction and supernatural fiction (Fantasy 574; Science 
706; Stableford, “Leiber” 933). He won six Hugo Awards, three Nebula Awards, three 
World Fantasy Awards, two British Fantasy Awards, an Ann Radcliffe Award, the 1975 
Grand Master of Fantasy Award, the 1976 Life Achievement Lovecraft Award, the 1981 
Grand Master Nebula Award, and the 1987 Bram Stoker Award for Life Achievement, 
as well as several others. The F&GM s hort story “Ill Met in Lankhmar” (1970) won 
both a Hugo (1971) and a Nebula (1970). While The Swords of Lankhmar  has won no 
major awards, it is commonly considered a classic of modern fantasy (see Fantasy 574; 
Science 706; Stableford, “Leiber” 936; Tymn et al. 116). Leiber’s talent for fantastic 
fiction is considerable and original, a nd Stableford provides perhaps the best 
explanation as to why this is so: 
Leiber’s stories are highly various, and they reveal him to be one of the most versatile 
fantasists. He is one of the few modern writers to be intimately familiar with the whole 
tradition of fantasy writing, and although he has never been influenced by other writers in 
the trivial sense of wanting to imitate their work . . . his familiarity with the motifs and 
methods of the best in supernatural fiction has helped to furnish his own imagination and 
has assisted him to enrich the tradition with his own contributions. (“Leiber” 935) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
 George R. R. Martin (1948 −) has been a professional writer of fantasy and science 
fiction since the early 1970s (see Fantasy 625; Science 779). He is also well-known as 
the editor of several notable science fiction anthologies (see Fantasy 625−26; Science 
779−80). His career has been a highly succ essful one, and he has won numerous 
awards, including four Hugo Awards, two Nebula Awards, a Bram Stoker Award, a 
World Fantasy Award, and eleven Locus Awards (see ibid.; The Locus Index). However, 
it was not until 1996 an d the publication of A Game of Thrones  in hardcover, the first 
novel in his seminal A Song of Ice and Fire series, and possibly his most important work 
to date, that Martin rose to bestselling fame. The novel won the 1997 Locus Award for 
Best Fantasy Novel, and was nominated for a Hugo, a Nebula, and a World Fantasy 
Award. In addition, Blood of the Dragon  (1996), a short story based on the Daenerys 
chapters from the novel, won the 1997 H ugo Award for Best Novella. The series, 
currently in its fourth  installment and looking to include  at least three more, has since 
become one of the most popular and critically acclaimed in modern fantasy. 
 Martin’s importance to the genre, namely with A Game of Thrones and the series 
as a whole, is a difficult topic for three reas ons. First, the huge popularity is a relatively 
recent phenomenon, and it is therefore too ear ly to say what the effects on modern 
fantasy have been, or what they will be. S econd, the series is not finished, which means 
that its reception and integration into the ge nre are still very much in progress. Third, 
partly due to the first two reas ons, and partly because the field itself is lacking in recent 
studies, there is precious little scholarly commentary on Martin and virtually nothing on 
the series. For example, while both The Encyclopedia of Fantasy and The Encyclopedia 
of Science Fiction have an entry on Martin, neither edition is recent enough to mention 
A Song of Ice and Fire . (Indeed, it will be interesting to  see how future editions discuss 
the author and the series.) However, given its popular and critical suc cess, there is little 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
doubt in my mind that the series will prove an important landmark in modern American 
fantasy. 
 Martin’s most important contribution to the genre will most likely be the 
multilayered realism that permeates the series. His characters are round and subtly 
drawn individuals driven by complex and r ealistic ambitions and motives. Much like 
Leiber’s characters, they are ordinary rather than extraordinary. There is neither absolute 
good nor absolute evil in Martin’s story world, merely shifting shades of gray. Even the 
few heroics are usually fortuitous acts of  desperation, or ro mantically colored 
misrepresentations, rather than the knightly acts of nobility that crowd traditional 
fantasy. Beyond the characterization, there is a new kind of grittiness to the story world, 
almost a kind of naturalism, that results in a pronouncedly unromantic and unforgiving 
otherworld (“a fantasy realm too vile for hobbi ts” as Dinitia Smith aptly puts it). This 
realism is further accentuated by Martin’s famously sparse and sub tle use of magic and 
other fantastic elements. The fantastic is often either naturalized as normal, in which 
case it passes unmarked through a character’ s consciousness, or  backgrounded as an 
ambiguous and mysterious force hovering on th e margins of consciousness and action. 
For a fantasy realm, Martin’s story world is a strikingly real place. 
 While this sort of realism, realistic char acterization in particular, is not altogether 
new to the genre, it is rarely found in such a multilayered combination and in such 
powerful form as in Martin. If Leiber was an early template for a new kind of realism in 
modern fantasy literature, then Martin is surely one of its fullest and finest current 
instantiations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
1.4. The Inward Turn 
The shift in narrative technique, the inward turn to borrow a popular coinage, can be 
described as a movement from one generic na rrative situation to another. What I have 
thus far called authorial narration  and figural narration  correspond to the authorial 
narrative situation and the figural narrative situation as defined by F. K. Stanzel. In an 
authorial narrative situation, the story is told by an overt heterodiegetic narrator whose 
storytelling powers often exte nd to omniscience and omnipresence, and who is known 
for his intrusions, commentaries, philosophical  reflections, reader addresses, and other 
similar vocal activities (Stanzel 5, 144; Jahn N1.15., N3.3.5.; Rimmon-Kenan 96). It is 
precisely the external and privileged perspe ctive of such a pers onalized narrator that 
organizes representation in authorial narration (Stanzel 5, 47−48, 55). 
 Figural narration, by comparison, presents the story from the limited perspective 
of a third person character (“figure”), creating the illusion that the story world is 
apprehended directly through that character’s consciousness (Stanzel 5, 48, 144). The 
external perspective of an authorial narrat or is thus replaced by the story-internal 
perspective of an experiencing consciousne ss, a “reflector” (Stanzel 5). Figural 
narration typically hides a highl y covert and unobtrusive narrator. Unlike the authorial 
narrator, he does not indulge in commentaries , instructions, or any other overt activities 
that might draw attention to his presen ce as a narrating agency. By backgrounding the 
act of narration and foregroundi ng the reflector character’s consciousness, the narrator 
of a figural narrative situation effectively effaces himself from view (see Jahn N1.18.; 
Stanzel 47). 
 In practice, modern heter odiegetic narratives do not, of  course, fall neatly into 
these two categories. As Stanzel himself notes, the narrative situations “must be 
understood first and foremost as rough descriptions of basi c possibilities” (4). They 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
                                                
describe “ideal types” only (Stanzel 8). Most heterodiegetic narratives fall somewhere 
between the two poles of authorial and figural narration (see Stanzel 141 −42, 168−69). 
That is, most authorial narratives contain elem ents of figural narration, and most figural 
narratives contain elements of  authorial narration. There ar e even ambiguous narratives 
that cannot be comfortably assigned to either category (Stanzel 145, 148). It follows that 
authorial narrators can be covert and impersonalized, and th at the narrators of figural 
narratives can sometimes display signs of  overtness and an authorial stance. 
Furthermore, “the narrative situation of the individual work is not a static condition but 
a dynamic process of constant modulation or oscillation” (Stanzel 185; see Jahn N1.19., 
N3.3.12.; Stanzel 141−42). It is often impossible to determine whether a passage is to be 
interpreted as authorial or figural (Stan zel 197). What finally decides the overall 
narrative situation of a given work is its preference for either type of narration: authorial 
narratives favor authorial narration, figural narratives favor figural narration. 
 The so-called inward turn of the novel 5, the first full exploration of figural 
techniques and sustained figural narration, is commonly agreed to have taken place 
during the late nineteenth century and the early twen tieth century (see Cohn 8 −9; 
Fludernik, Narratology 169− 72; Jahn N1.18., N8.8.; Stanzel 62, 185 −86). This 
development is usually associated with aut hors such as Gustave Flaubert, Henry James, 
Franz Kafka, Katherine Mansfield, D. H. Lawrence, James Joyce, Virginia Woolf, 
Dorothy Richardson, and William Faulkner, to name a few (Jahn N1.18., N8.8.; see 
Cohn 26, 113−15; Stanzel 133, 136). Modernism and the Modernist novel are typically 
considered the culmination point in the inward turn (see Cohn 8; Fludernik, Narratology 
172). Furthermore, the development of figur al narration is often linked with the 
 
 
 
5 The term originates from Erich Kahler’s Die Verinnerung des Erzählens  (1957 −58), translated 
posthumously as The Inward Turn of Narrative (1973) (see Cohn 8; Onega and Landa 22). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
                                                
development of free indirect discourse 6, which, for many scholars, represents the 
quintessential technique for representing figural consciousness (see Cohn 111, 112 −15, 
139; Fludernik, Narratology 153−58; cf. Palmer 30−31). 
 Figural narrative techniques far precede th e inward turn, of course. While true 
reflectoral narratives had to wait for the likes of Joyce and Woolf, many earlier authorial 
narratives already display figur al techniques as part of th eir formal repertoire. The 
writer who is usually credited with introducing figural narration (and thus free indirect 
discourse) into the English novel is Jane Austen (1775 −1817) (see Cohn 113). Stanzel 
even goes so far as to classify Emma (1815) as a hybrid form suspended between the 
authorial and the figural (xvi; see 148). Monika Fludernik lo cates the origins of figural 
narration and the use of  free indirect discourse for the representation of consciousness 
even earlier, in Aphra Behn (1640 −89) ( Narratology 130− 31, 153− 58, 169 −72). In 
addition to Behn and Austen, Fludernik also takes up other important early contributors 
such as Horace Walpole (1717 −97), Ann Radcliffe (1764 −1823), and the Gothic novel 
tradition in general (see Narratology 48, 170−72). 
 Irene de Jong goes yet further, arguing th at substantial figural narration can be 
found as far back as Homer (see de J ong). Drawing her examples from Homer, 
Herodotus, Thucydides, and Apollonius Rhodius , she claims that each author already 
displays clear tendencies toward represen ting the story world through the subjective 
perspective of one or more ch aracters rather than the omniscient perspective of an 
authorial narrator as has usually been assu med. While the argument is interesting and 
the analysis thoughtful, de Jong’s claim is suspect fo r several reasons: what she 
interprets as figural narrati on could as easily – and perhaps more readily – be read as 
 
 
 
6 For a fuller discussion on free indirect discours e and related techniques, see section 3.1. below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
authorial glimpses inside the minds of ch aracters; she makes no distinction between 
representation through a single figural perspective and the collective or simultaneous 
representation through multiple perspectives (which, by definition, is an authorial 
maneuver); she makes no mention of free indi rect discourse; and she never addresses 
the possible linguistic discrepa ncies between the English pros e translations (which she 
uses) and the Ancient Greek originals. Neve rtheless, her argument does suggest that 
perhaps figural narration, in some rudiment ary form, can be found even further back 
than either Austen or Behn. 
1.5. Note on Terminology 
In this thesis, the word authorial is reserved exclusively for fictional narrators and 
narrating in heterodiegetic contexts. It is a qualitative modifier meant to evoke a type of 
narrator or narratorial activity. It has nothing to do with real -life authors. (Indeed, this 
thesis has precious little to say about them in  the first place.) I am aware that this may 
strike a wrong chord with some Anglo-American narratologists, but my main concern is 
to remain consistent with my research sources. Cohn, Fludernik, Jahn, and Stanzel all 
employ the word authorial in the manner I have just described. (Rimmon-Kenan does 
not discuss narrative situations as such, and therefore refers to authorial narrators and 
related phenomena only sporadically.) 
 Furthermore, while both narratorial and omniscient, for example, are good 
alternatives for authorial, they are ultimately unsatisfactory. Narratorial is simply too 
broad, since it can refer to any narrator-relate d phenomenon, authorial or otherwise. By 
comparison, omniscient carries too narrow a connotation: there is more to narrators and 
narrating than knowledge. In addition, and more to the point, authorial narrators need 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
not be consistently omniscient (see section 1.4. above; Stanzel 126). For my purposes in 
this thesis, then, authorial remains the best choice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20
                                                
2. FROM AUTHORIAL TO FIGURAL PERCEPTION 
2.1. Preliminaries: Consciousness and Focalization 
Following Monika Fludernik, I consider fic tional narratives to be primarily about 
consciousness and the mediation of experience 7 through consciousness ( Narratology 
12−13, 49− 50). The mediating consciousness may be that of a narrator, a reflector 
character, or some agency in between. Howe ver, the object of medi ation is always the 
same: anthropomorphic experience inside a story world. According to this approach, 
then, the representation of consciousness is not merely a feature of narration but the 
feature. Thus, when I discuss the representati on of consciousness, I refer to the entire 
narrative framework: everything that contributes to how a story world is apprehended, 
and how experience in it is mediated. The na rrator’s relation to the story world and to 
focalization are as relevant here as how closely the narrator’s language approximates the 
language of characters, or how much psychonarration there is. 
 Accordingly, my analysis is divided into  two parts: consciousness in narration and 
consciousness in language. The former focuses on such overarching aspects of narration 
as perspective and mode (i.e., how the story world is perceived and by whom). In the 
latter, I focus on language, and discuss the e vocation of consciousness and voice from a 
more linguistically oriented point of view. This division  is, of course, somewhat 
arbitrary. Actual narratives are entities th at come neatly apart only in theoretical 
abstractions, and even then with difficulty. It is not as though one can discuss narration 
 
 
 
7 Experience here refers to the “the quasi-mimetic evocation of ‘real-life experience’”, what Fludernik 
calls “experientiality” ( Narratology 12). In other words, experience encompasses everything that a 
character goes through in the course  of a narrative, and this experience is interpreted by readers as 
analogous to real human experience, as relating to “human existence and human concerns” (Fludernik, 
Narratology 13). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21
without discussing the language from which it is construed in the first place. A certain 
amount of overlap is thus inevitable. None theless, the distinct ion is a convenient 
abstraction and should make the analysis easier to follow. 
 Before going into the analysis, let me in troduce what is perhaps the most useful 
tool for distinguishing between  authorial narration and figural narration: focalization. 
Focalization has received its fair share of schol arly attention, of course: Gérard Genette, 
Mieke Bal, Seymour Chatman, Manfred Ja hn, Susan Lanser, Ansgar Nünning, Patrick 
O’Neill, Gerald Prince, Shlomith Rimmon-Kenan, and others have discussed it (see 
Jahn N3.2.3.; Phelan 53). But for the purposes of  this thesis I shall draw mainly on Jahn 
and Rimmon-Kenan, who both provide an excellent analysis of focalization. In addition, 
Rimmon-Kenan’s account is an encompassing synthesis of various earlier theories 
which makes it doubly useful. 
 Every narrative involves two principal agents: one whose pe rception orients the 
narration, and another who verbalizes this perception (Jahn N3.2.2.; Rimmon-Kenan 72, 
75). The former is called the focalizer while the latter is the narrator. Focalization is thus 
“a means of selecting and restricting narrative  information, of seeing events and states 
of affairs from somebody’s point of view” (Jahn N3.2.2.). Note that point of view needs 
to be understood broadly here. In addition to sensory percep tion, it also covers the 
focalizer’s “cognitive, emotive and ideologi cal orientation” (Rimmon-Kenan 72; see 
Jahn N3.2.2.). In other words, focalization is about perception in a very broad sense. 
 Narration and focalization may or may not  coincide in the same agent (Rimmon-
Kenan 73). Further, focalization “can be either external or internal to the story. External 
focalization is felt to be close to the narr ating agent [whereas] the locus of internal 
focalization is inside the represented events” (Rimmon-Kenan 75 −76). Roughly 
speaking, in external focalization the focal izer is the narrator,  and in internal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22
focalization s/he is a character in the story (i.e., a reflector). External focalization 
therefore corresponds to authorial narration, and internal focalization to figural narration 
(see Jahn N1.18., N3.3.7.; Rimmon-Kenan 78−82; Stanzel 141). Lastly, focalization can 
render the object of focalizati on (“the focalized”) either fr om within or from without 
(Rimmon-Kenan 77). 
 Rimmon-Kenan distinguishes between thre e facets of focalization: perceptual, 
psychological, and ideological (see 78−84). The perceptual facet, or sensory orientation, 
is further divided into spatial and temporal focalization, and the psychological facet into 
cognitive and emotive focalization. The follo wing analysis is organized roughly around 
the spatial, temporal, and cognitive aspects of focalization. These three are more than 
sufficient for exploring the narrative patterns  at work in Leiber and Martin, since both 
narratives use focalization in a relatively c onsistent manner across the board, and I have 
therefore opted to exclude emotion and ideolo gy from the analysis . In principal, any 
three would suffice. 
2.2. Story Space and Story Time 
2.2.1. Space 
Panoramic focalization, that is, external foca lization that presents a comprehensive and 
unobstructed view of events and places in stor y space, is one of the staples of authorial 
narration (see Rimmon-Kenan 78). It is also  the most pronounced form of external 
focalization in terms of spatial perception. As befits an authorial narrator, the narrator in 
Leiber’s The Swords of Lankhmar  makes ample use of this technique. He often begins 
chapters and subsections with panoramic views such as this one: 
The rats everywhere launched their grand assault on Lankhmar Above a half hour before 
midnight, striking chiefly by way of golden ratholes. There were a few premature sorties, as 
on Silver Street, and elsewhere a few delays, as at ratholes discovered and blocked by 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
humans at the last moment, but on the whol e the attack was simultaneous. (Leiber, Swords 
199) 
Here the perspective is clearly that of an om niscient narrator. No individual character in 
the story could possibly see what all the rats were doing in their countless ratholes, or 
how the assault was progressing in differen t locations at the same time. Only an 
authorial narrator focalizing from above, so to speak, can command such a privileged 
view of story space. The distance to individual characters is at its maximum here. 
 While there are many panoramic passages in Leiber, some extending over entire 
scenes and subsections (e.g., the above quota tion opens one of several panoramically 
narrated interludes that survey the rat inva sion in Lankhmar), the story is typically 
presented from a perspective more closely atta ched to the characters or the center of 
action. The following passage provides a typical example of a visual perspective that is 
external without being panoramic: 
Ship’s master Slinoor looked back with hooded appraising eyes at the small lithe gray-clad 
man and his tall, more gaudily accoutered  barbarian comrade. The master of Squid was a 
sleek black-robed man of middle years. He stood beside the two stocky black-tunicked 
bare-legged sailors who held steady the great high-arching tiller that guided Squid. (Leiber, 
Swords 13) 
Even though it is Slinoor who is looking here, the scene is clearly not focalized through 
his perspective, since he too is an object  of observation (“hooded appraising eyes”, “a 
sleek black-robed man of middle years”). Nor do es the perspective belong to “the small 
lithe gray-clad man” or “his tall, more gaudily accoutered barbarian comrade” as they 
are focalized from the outside as well. Apart from these three characters, there is no one 
present at the scene who could conceivably function as the focalizer, which leaves only 
the narrator as external focalizer. (There is, however, a hint of figural perspective in the 
first sentence: “looked back” could suggest a brie f or partial adoption of Slinoor’s 
spatial perspective.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24
 This external perspective is even more pronounced when the focalization switches 
spatially between multiple characters. In such cases of consecutive focalization, it is the 
narrator’s evident privilege of moving freel y within story space that foregrounds the 
authorial, unrestricted nature of the narration. For example, consider the spatial shifts in 
the following passage which has Fafhrd riding down a hill, and Kreeshkra, Fafhrd’s 
ghoulish lover, situated atop the hill: 
 Kreeshkra sprang up, snatched the bow and ar row, ran to the rim of the grassy saucer 
and drew a bead on Fafhrd’s back, held it fo r three heartbeats, then turned abruptly and 
winged the arrow at the thorn tree. It lodged quivering in the center of the gray trunk. 
 Fafhrd glanced quickly around at the snap, whir, tchunk! A skeleton arm was waving 
him goodbye and continued to do so until he reached the road at the foot of the slope, where 
he urged the mare into a long-striding lope. 
 On the hilltop Kreeshkra stood in thought for two breaths. Then from her belt she 
detached something invisible, which she dropped in the center of the dying campfire. 
 There was a sputtering and a shower of sparks , when a bright blue flame shot straight up 
a dozen yards and burnt for as many heartbeats before it di ed. Kreeshkra’s bones looked 
like blued iron, her glinting glassy flesh like scraps of tropic night-sky, but there was none 
to see this beauty. 
 Fafhrd watched the needlelike flare over shoulder as he sped rockingly along and he 
frowned into the wind. (Leiber, 
Swords 121) 
The narrator begins by focalizing on Kreeshkr a as she snatches the bow and shoots the 
arrow (“drew a bead on Fafhrd’s back” aligns  the narrative perspective spatially with 
Kreeshkra’s position). As the arrow hits th e tree trunk, focalization shifts briefly to 
Fafhrd. Kreeshkra is now seen from Fafhrd’s perspective: “A skeleton arm was waving 
him goodbye” (note the spatial distance suggested by “skeleton arm”). A second shift 
occurs with “On the hilltop” which returns the narrative to Kreeshkra. Finally, there is 
another shift to Fafhrd who is now watching “the needlelike flare over shoulder” (note 
the even greater spatial distance suggested by “the needlelike flare”). 
 Even though the two Fafhrd paragraphs in the above passage can be interpreted as 
internally focalized through Fafhrd’s perspective, the framework for the whole passage 
is patently authorial. The authorial na rration is most pronounced when the narrator 
describes Kreeshkra’s macabre beauty through external focalization, and then proceeds 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
25
                                                
to note how there is no one present to see this beauty: “Kreeshkra’s bones looked like 
blued iron, her glinting glassy flesh like scraps of tropic night-sky, but there was none to 
see this beauty” (ibid.). The implied para dox in the concluding statement can only be 
resolved by assigning the sentence to an au thorial narrator situat ed outside the story 
world.8 Coupled with the overall pa ttern of consecutive foca lization and the external 
focalization on Kreeshkra, this statement esta blishes the whole passage as authorially 
narrated. Indeed, the au thorial framework might even pr ompt one to read the Fafhrd 
paragraphs as externally focalized glimpses into Fafhrd’s perspective (Rimmon-Kenan’s 
“external focalization from within” (77)) rath er than as instances of actual internal 
focalization by Fafhrd himself. 
 Despite the dominance of external focalization, internal focalization is by no 
means uncommon in Leiber. Brief approximations of figural perception often extend to 
sustained passages of perspectiv ized narration, marking a shift from external to internal 
focalization. For instance, note how the sp ace around the Mouser is here perceived 
strictly in terms of what he can see and hear: 
Splashings began, first two and then three, then what sounded like a half dozen together, 
mixed with screams. The Mouser twisted his head around and from the corner of his eye 
saw the last two of Squid’s sailors leap over the side. Straining a little further around yet, he 
saw Slinoor clutch to his chest two rats that worried him and follow the sailors . . . . When 
the Mouser turned his head aft again, Hisvet was standing before him. (Leiber, Swords 
62−63) 
The narration clearly follows th e Mouser’s path of percepti on, from what he can hear 
taking place outside his field of vision (“what sounded like”) to what he can see by 
turning his head. The internal focalization is  further strengthened  by the surrounding 
narrative which adheres very closely to the Mouser’s perspective (see Leiber, Swords 
59−65). 
 
 
 
8 For another example of this classic paradox of omniscience, see the Leiber quote on page 1 above. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26
 An even more restricted sensory persp ective prevails in th e morning-after scene 
involving Fafhrd and what he believes to be  his previous night’s conquest (or possibly 
conquests). Fafhrd is lying in bed with his eyes shut and his hands  happily groping for 
wine and women. Perception of space is limite d solely to what he  can feel, hear and 
smell (and imagine): 
To his left, within easy arm-reach on a stout night table would be a large pewter flagon of 
light wine. Even now he could sense, he thought, its coolth. Good. 
 To his right, within even easier reach, Hr enlet. He could feel her radiant warmth and 
hear her snoring – very loudly, in fact. 
 . . . . 
 Fafhrd permitted himself a dr y-throated, raspy yawn. Was ever man so fortunate? At his 
left hand, wine. At his right a beauteous girl , or more likely two, since there was a sweet 
strong farm-smell coming to him under the sheets; and what is juicier than a farmer’s (or 
cattleman’s) redhead daughter? While under hi s pillows— He twisted his head and neck 
luxuriously; he couldn’t quite feel the tight-bulging bag of golden coins – the pillows were 
many and thick – but he could imagine it. 
 . . . . 
 Then with his right hand he stroked the girl – Hrenlet, or her cousin? – from shoulder to 
haunch. 
 She was covered with short bristly fur and, at his amorous touch, she mooed. (Leiber, 
Swords 75−76) 
The girl under the sheets turns out to be a calf, planted there by the real Hrenlet in 
exchange for Fafhrd’s gold and manly pride. The supposed conqueror turns out to be the 
conquered. The reason for the carefully plot ted internal focaliz ation is obvious: it 
simply makes for better comedy to gradually build up the scene inside the self-absorbed 
hero’s consciousness rather than give the game away through an external perspective. 
 In addition to shifts between external and internal focalization, Leiber’s narrative 
sometimes adopts a character’s spatial persp ective only partially. The resulting view of 
story space is left suspended between external and internal focalization, belonging 
neither to a character nor to th e narrator as external focaliz er, yet still retaining a sense 
of story-internal subjectivity. Consider, for example, the observer in this passage: 
Hisvet and Frix were in the cabin with the do or shut. The Demoiselle had wanted to watch 
the duel through the op en door or even from the afterdeck, but Lukeen had protested that 
this would make it easier for her to work an evil spell on him, and the judges had ruled for 
Lukeen. However the grille was open and now and again the sun’s rays twinkled on a 
peering eye or silvered fingernail. (Leiber, 
Swords 40−41) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
27
                                                
Who sees the sun’s rays twinkling on a peerin g eye or a silvered fingernail? Hisvet and 
Frix are clearly out of the que stion, since they are the ones inside the cabin. Lukeen is 
also an unlikely choice because the surrounding  narrative is in no way anchored to his 
perspective. Also, if Lukeen were the observer, one would e xpect the last sentence to 
make some reference to him (e.g., “now and again Lukeen could see the sun’s rays 
twinkle on a peering eye”). The only agent left is the narrator. 
 However, the visually restricted qualit y of the focalization (“a peering eye or 
silvered fingernail” (ibid.)) argues agains t external focalization, suggesting instead 
internal focalization by someone inside th e story world. But since there is no specific 
someone available who could function as the focalizer, the perspective must belong to 
anyone and everyone. In other words, it can be  argued that the focalizer position is one 
that any character on deck could potentially possess, and probably does possess at some 
point during the duel, but that no character inhabits exclusively. Should one nevertheless 
want to claim this collective perspective for the narrator, it could be conceptualized as 
an anonymous character position that the narrator temporarily projects on the scene and 
adopts.
9 The reading effect, however, remains the same: an ambiguous story-internal 
perspective suspended between character and narrator. 
 Leiber’s narrator clearly displays a wide va riety of approaches  for rendering the 
story world spatially: panoramic views alternate with closer views of events and places, 
external focalization with internal focalization on space, and so forth. Yet despite the 
overall authorial structure, the narrative often veers toward figurally narrated 
perception. 
 
 
 
9 This is precisely how Stanzel conceives the phenom enon, as the “reflectori zation” of an authorial 
narrator (170). That is, “reflect orization means the assumption by the teller-character [an authorial 
narrator] of particular attributes of a reflector-character” (ibid.; see Stanzel 168 −84). For more on 
reflectorization, see page 50 below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
 By comparison, Martin’s narrator in A Game of Thrones  filters practically 
everything through reflector characters. Each  chapter in the novel presents the story 
from the limited perspective of a single character (save for the prologue, all chapters are 
actually named after the corre sponding center-of-consciousness character). As a rule, 
the narrator perceives only what the reflector characters perceive. 
 Figural perception of space is highly pr onounced when the object of perception is 
something the reflector character cannot prope rly perceive, that is, when the already 
limited perspective of the reflector is further limited by spatial circumstances. A case in 
point in Martin is the scene where Catel yn is keeping watch over her comatose son, 
Bran, in his sickroom, while arguing with her eldest son, Robb. Their quarrel is 
interrupted when a fire suddenly breaks ou t in the library towe r across the castle 
courtyard. Note the way the fire is focalized through Catelyn’s perspective: 
 Fire, she thought, and then, Bran! “Help me,” she said urgently, sitting up. “Help me 
with Bran.” 
 Robb did not seem to hear her. “The library tower’s on fire,” he said. 
 Catelyn could see the flickering reddish light through the open window now. She sagged 
with relief. Bran was safe. The library was across the bailey, there was no way the fire 
would reach them here. “Thank the gods,” she whispered. 
 Robb looked at her as if she’d gone mad. “Mother, stay here. I’ll come back as soon as 
the fire’s out.” He ran then. She heard him shout to the guards outside the room, heard them 
descending together in a wild rush, taking the stairs two and three at a time. 
 Outside, there were shouts of “Fire!” in  the yard, screams, running footsteps, the 
whinny of frightened horses, and the frantic barking of the castle dogs. (Martin 131−32) 
The world outside Bran’s sickroom is reduced to a cacophony of sounds, and to what 
Catelyn can glimpse through the open window. For Catelyn, and hence for the narrator, 
the fire exists mainly in th e shouts, screams, and animal sounds coming from the yard 
outside, and briefly as a “flickering reddish light” seen through the window. In other 
words, the narrative renders the fire as Cate lyn perceives it from her confined position 
inside the sickroom: vaguely and mainly indirectly. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
29
 It is also significant that Catelyn loses interest in the fire the moment she realizes 
that Bran is not in danger (“She sagged with  relief. Bran was safe” (Martin 131)). She 
focalizes the fire as a passive recipient of i rrelevant sensory information rather than an 
active observer of a potential disa ster. The motivation for this is clear: the fire does not 
concern her since it seems to pose no threat to her child. The sketchy focalization on the 
fire therefore results not only from a spa tially confined position but also from a 
psychologically indifferent one. Indeed, Cate lyn’s indifference is evident when she 
closes the window and shuts out the world: 
Catelyn said a silent prayer of thanks to the seven faces of god as she went to the window. 
Across the bailey, long tongues of flame shot from the windows of the library. She watched 
the smoke rise into the sky and thought sadly of all the books the Starks had gathered over 
the centuries. Then she closed the shutters. (Martin 132) 
Catelyn’s gratitude to the gods and sadness over the lost books  seem sorely out of place 
during an incident as dangerous as the fire. Her final act of closin g the window shutters 
underscores her misplaced priorities quite vivi dly. However, from the perspective of a 
mother who is mad with grief over he r son’s condition, Catelyn’s actions and 
disposition make sense. 
 A particularly interesting rendering of  story space through a reflector character 
occurs when Bran wakes up from his coma. The coma ends in a dream in which Bran is 
falling through darkness, with the world spread out below him. A talking crow is trying 
to teach him how to fly. He learns to fly just as he is about to hit the ground, but then the 
crow attacks him, and the dream is dispelled: 
The crow opened its beak and cawed at him, a shrill scream of fear, and the grey mists 
shuddered and swirled around him and ripped away like a veil, and he saw that the crow 
was really a woman, a serving woman with long black hair, and he knew her from 
somewhere, from Winterfell, yes, that was it, he remembered her now, and then he realized 
that he was in Winterfell, in a bed high in some chilly tower room, and the black-haired 
woman dropped a basin of water to shatter on the floor and ran down the steps, shouting, 
“He’s awake, he’s awake, he’s awake.” (Martin 164) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30
The shift from the dream world to the real world is entirely unmarked. Bran’s 
consciousness simply flows from one world to the other, registering it all as though it 
were a single reality. The reader knows that Br an is awake, and that he is looking with 
his real eyes rather than his mind’s eye wh en the crow turns into the serving woman 
(“the crow was really a woman, a serving woman”). The narrative bridges Bran’s 
internal, imagined space and the external, physical space from within, as it were, 
through Bran’s perceiving consciousness, and it does this seamlessly. The accumulation 
of delayed realizations furt her accentuates and develops this subjectivity (“a serving 
woman . . . he knew her from somewhere . . . he remembered her now . . . he realized 
that he was in Winterfell, in a bed high in some chilly tower room”). Note also how the 
narrative empathically echoes Bran’s inner voice in “yes, that was it”. 
 External focalization on space, by comparis on, is virtually nonexistent in Martin. I 
have found only one instance wh ere Martin’s otherwise consistent internal focalization 
on space is clearly violated by external focali zation: Bran’s fall from the broken castle 
tower. In the following passage, the first two paragraphs are focalized by Bran, but 
consider the focalization in the last paragraph which follows the fall: 
 The man looked over at the woman. “The things I do for love,” he said with loathing. 
He gave Bran a shove. 
 Screaming, Bran went backward out the wi ndow into empty air. There was nothing to 
grab on to. The courtyard rushed up to meet him. 
 Somewhere off in the distance, a wolf was howling. Crows circled the broken tower, 
waiting for corn. (Martin 85) 
Who focalizes on the howling and the crows? Cl early it has to be the narrator as the 
reflector character for the chapter has just hit the courtyard and probably perished. Yet 
there is no discernible change  in the narrative language. In  other words, the shift from 
internal to external focalization does not affect the narrator’s covertness. There is even a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31
trace of figural perspectivism in the indistin ct “somewhere off in the distance”. If not 
for the fall, the focalizer could actually be Bran. 
 The reason for this violation is obvious: the last paragraph ends the dramatic turn 
of events on a properly somber yet ominous  note. The distant howling and the circling 
crows paint a menacing image: Is Bran dead ? Moreover, the image is an appropriately 
personal one for Bran, since it is his wolf that is howling in the distance, and the crows 
are waiting for the corn that he sometimes brings them when he climbs the broken 
tower. The penultimate paragraph would have been too abrupt a passage emotionally to 
end the chapter with. Martin, then, is not above prioritizing the needs of dramatic 
storytelling over those of formal consistency. 
 While the internally focalized passages from Martin are ba sically analogous to 
those from Leiber, it bears re peating that in Martin internal focalization on space is the 
rule rather than the exception. In Martin, story space is almost always focalized through 
a reflector character’s consci ousness, whereas in Leiber spatial focalization tends to 
originate in the narrator’s external perspective, even though there are definite shifts 
toward and into internal focalization. 
2.2.2. Time 
According to Rimmon-Kenan, external focaliza tion is “panchronic” in terms of story 
time, that is, “an external focalizer has at his disposal all the temporal dimensions of the 
story (past, presen t and future)” (79 −80). By comparison, “internal focalization is 
synchronous with the informa tion regulated by the focaliz er” (Rimmon-Kenan 79). In 
other words, internal focalization is restricted to the focalizer’s present (Rimmon-Kenan 
80). An authorial narrator, then, has free reign over story time, whereas the narrator in a 
figural narrative situation is limited to the reflector character’s temporal coordinates. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
                                                
 Considering how diversely Leiber’s narrator treats story space, it is somewhat 
surprising how conservative he is with story ti me. By and large, the narrative adheres to 
the present of the characters, even if it sometimes only skims it. Authorial shifts in story 
time are few and far between, and usually implied rather than actual. Consider, for 
example, the temporal perspective in this passage: “Thereafter th ere swiftly grew in 
Lankhmar a new legend of the Gray Mouser  and Fafhrd: how as rat-small midget and 
bell-tower giant they had saved La nkhmar from the rats” (Leiber, 
Swords 229). Given 
that the narrative returns to present time in the next paragraph, this passage can only be 
an authorial flashforward. However, since the future is not actually perceived in any 
sensory fashion, the passage is perhaps more appropriately conceived as knowledge of 
the future. Indeed, external focalization on pa st and future events in Leiber typically 
comes down to what the narrator knows rather than what he directly perceives. 
 But what the narrative lack s in temporal shifts, it more than makes up for in 
temporal summaries. In Leiber, scenic fo calization on action, whether external or 
internal, is often interspersed with or replaced by condensations and compressions of 
action: the narration remains s ynchronous with respect to th e now of story time, but the 
pace of narration picks up considerably.
10 The use of such narrative devices necessarily 
implies the presence of an authorial narrator manipulating story time (see Jahn N5.3.1.; 
Rimmon-Kenan 99). A case in point is the scene where Fafhrd and the Mouser (“the two 
adventurers”) are conversing with Karl Treuherz, a traveler from another world, while 
the latter’s pet dragon (“Scylla’s sated daughter”) is circling about: 
 
 
 
10 Scene or scenic presentation is a narrative mode which presents an event in detail, foregrounding 
narrative information while backgrounding the narrator, and where story time is conventionally 
conceived as flowing in real time, that is, in approximate congruence with the narration (Jahn N5.3.1.; 
Rimmon-Kenan 54). By comparison, summary is a narrative mode where “the pace is accelerated 
through a textual ‘condensation’ or ‘compression’ of a given story-period into a relatively short 
statement of its main features” (Rimmon-Kenan 53; see Jahn N5.3.1.). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33
                                                
All the rest of that night the two adventurers conversed with Karl Treuherz, telling each 
other fabulous things about each other’s wo rlds, while Scylla’s sated daughter slowly 
circled Squid, first one head sleeping and then the other. Talking was slow and uncertain 
work, even with the aid of the little Lankhmarese-German German-Lankhmarese 
Dictionary for Space-Time and Inter-Cosmic Travelers , and neither party really believed a 
great deal of the other’s tales, yet pretended to for friendship’s sake. (Leiber, Swords 73) 
Temporal condensation is here signaled explicitly by the opening clause (“All the rest of 
that night the two adventurers conversed with Karl Treuherz”). The main action, the 
conversation, is abridged to its bare essentials. All the reader really learns is that the two 
parties tell each other amazing stories, that this is slow going because of the language 
barrier, and that neither party really beli eves the other’s stories, even though they 
pretend to out of courtesy. The specifics of the tales and the telling are omitted, and for a 
good reason: the specifics are not important to  the story. It is the privilege of the 
authorial narrator to omit the details and summarize the acti on through external 
focalization. The authorial cast of the passage is further apparent in the panoramic view 
of the scene, and in the collective focalizat ion on multiple minds (“neither party really 
believed . . . yet pretended to”).11
 Temporal summaries are relatively co mmon in Leiber, and typically serve to 
speed up the story and bridge together more  important scenes that are rendered in 
greater scenic detail and temporal congruen ce. They are also used, although less often, 
for flashback exposition, where the narrator looks back in time, and allows the narrative 
to catch up with the story by briefly recountin g a character’s steps since his or her last 
appearance (e.g., Fafhrd’s long ride (Leiber, Swords 91−92)). In addition to such more 
clearly authorial instances, flashback exposit ion is occasionally displaced inside the 
mind of a character: the past is focali zed through a characte r’s memory, and the 
 
 
 
11 For a contrasting reading between external and inte rnal temporal focalization, compare the temporal 
acceleration in this passage with the pronounced te mporal congruence in the passage where Fafhrd is 
snug abed with the furry calf (see page 26 above). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
exposition is conveniently cam ouflaged as an act of reme mbering (e.g., the Mouser’s 
trek through the Marsh (Leiber, Swords 109)). However, summarizing the past from 
within a character’s consciousness is more about the character’s knowledge of the past 
than about the narrator’s manipulation of story time, and therefore does not really 
qualify as a temporal shift in the formal sense. After all, the act of remembering, 
although oriented toward the past, takes pl ace in the present of  the focalizing or 
focalized character. 
 In Martin’s A Game of Thrones , as one might expect, the narration is mostly 
synchronous with the present of the reflector characters. Since inte rnal focalization and 
figural perspectivism are the rule, external focalization on story time is exceedingly 
rare: authorial shifts in time and temporal summaries are for the most part absent. All 
the preceding passages from Martin already demonstrate the close temporal synchrony 
and congruence that characterizes the narra tive. This adherence to the reflector’s 
present, although never thematic in Martin, is occasionally highly pronounced: 
 Afterward Maester Luwin arrived to dress her wounds. The cuts in her fingers went 
deep, almost to the bone, and her scalp was raw and bleeding where he’d pulled out a 
handful of hair. The maester told her the pain was just starting now, and gave her milk of 
the poppy to help her sleep. 
 Finally she closed her eyes. 
 When she opened them again, they told her that she had slept four days. Catelyn nodded 
and sat up in bed. (Martin 133−34) 
Like Catelyn’s consciousness, the narrative simply skips the four days. For Catelyn, and 
therefore for the narrator, time flows direct ly from the moment of falling asleep (“she 
closed her eyes”) to the moment of waking up (“she opened them again”). The narrative 
completely adheres to Catelyn’s subjective perception of time. (It even makes sense that 
she does not dream or remember having dreamt as her sleep is one of utter exhaustion.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35
 A similar instance of subjective tempor al perception finds another reflector 
character, Tyrion Lannister, losing track of a few seconds when a direwolf attacks him 
in the woods: 
He never saw the wolf, where it was or how it came at him. One moment he was walking 
toward Snow and the next he was flat on his back on the hard rocky ground, the book 
spinning away from him as he fell, the breath going out of him at the sudden impact, his 
mouth full of dirt and blood and rotting leaves. As he tried to get up, his back spasmed 
painfully. He must have wrenched it in the fall. (Martin 125) 
The attack itself is never narrated. Even the ensuing fall is focalized only partially, with 
the actual falling action omitted. The suddenness and shock of the attack cause Tyrion’s 
mind to miss a step. Because the narration is internally focalized, the narrative renders 
only his fragmentary perception of the event: him walking and then suddenly hitting the 
ground. The middle is missing precisely because the reflector character’s consciousness 
fails to register it. 
 But notice how the event is effectively depi cted twice: once in the incipit sentence 
“He never saw the wolf, where it was or how it came at him” (ibid.) that prefigures the 
attack, and again in the actual scenic rende ring of the event in the second sentence. The 
incipit is almost like a quick flashforward. That is, the narrative seems to skip ahead a 
few seconds, and then quickly double back for another try. Although this technically 
violates internal focalizati on and temporal sync hrony with the focaliz er’s present, the 
overall reading effect, to my mind, is ne vertheless one of a c ontinuous present as 
perceived by Tyrion. The present participles in  particular anchor the focalization to a 
tangible here and now (“the book spinning away . . . the breath going out of him” 
(ibid.)). In reading the passage, the incipit f unctions as a dramatic beat that accentuates 
the suddenness of the moment, making the scene itself that much more powerful. In 
effect, then, there is no violation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36
 The temporal synchrony in Martin also affects the overa ll narrative structure: not 
only do the individual chapters adhere to the present of their reflector character, but they 
also share a single timeline. When story time  passes for one reflector character in one 
chapter, it also passes equally for all the other reflector characters (and for the story 
world as a whole). The narrative never picks up a reflector character’s story thread from 
where (or rather, when) it was left off in a previous chapter. This  sort of overarching 
synchrony with a single, shared present accentuates the narrative’s immersion in the 
story world as experienced through the reflector characters. 
 Of course, the lost time is  often surveyed retrospectively in a reflector character’s 
consciousness. Such subjective flashbacks (“mnemonic flashbacks” in Cohn’s 
terminology (37)) are a convenient means of  providing exposition after the fact, 
especially in figural narration where the narrator cannot st ep in to explain, and Martin’s 
narrative certainly makes vorac ious use of them. Indeed, the flashbacks are sometimes 
sustained for so long, and narrated with such  close spatial and temporal approximation 
to the past event that an act ual shift in story time seems to occur (e.g., Daenerys’s vivid 
recollection of a late ni ght supper and a nightmare that followed (Martin 99 −101); 
Tyrion recalls his capture by Catelyn (Martin 325 −28); Catelyn’s recollection of a duel, 
sparked by watching another duel in present time (Martin 439 −40)). However, these 
movements in story time are always embedded in internal focalization, and thus to the 
focalizer’s present. The fact  that they conveniently prov ide the reader with useful 
information may draw attention to the narr ating authority lurking behind the reflector 
character, but they are nevertheless always recuperable as re flection by a figural 
consciousness situated in the now of story time (see Cohn 37 −38, 128; Rimmon-Kenan 
51). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
 Even though internal focalization and te mporal synchrony are the rule in Martin, 
there are moments when the narrator seems to switch briefly into external focalization 
on story time. One of the most conspicuous vi olations comes at the end of one of Jon’s 
chapters. Jon has just given his sister, Arya, a needle-shaped short sword as a parting 
gift, and is about to leave on his long journey north: 
 “Like Ice,” she said. She look ed at the blade in her hand. “Does this have a name? Oh, 
tell me.” 
 “Can’t you guess?” Jon teased . “Your very favorite thing.” 
 Arya seemed puzzled at first. Then it came  to her. She was that quick. They said it 
together: 
 “ Needle!” 
 The memory of her laughter warmed him on the long ride north. (Martin 98) 
Until the last paragraph, the narrative adheres closely to Jon’s focalization in present 
time. Not counting the paragraph, the chapter covers perhaps an hour of Jon’s life. By 
comparison, the single sentence that makes up the last paragraph seems to span the 
entire ride north, a journey lasting several weeks. It is difficult to say whether the 
sentence constitutes a flashforward or a cove rt temporal summary of the journey. (It 
turns out, in fact, to be a flashforward as th e journey is later focaliz ed in greater detail 
by another reflector character.) In any case, the passage cannot possibly be focalized by 
Jon: as a flashforward, it presents objectiv e information that Jon does not yet possess 
(i.e., he is yet to embark on the journey and affectionately remember his sister’s 
laughter); as a temporal summary, it breaks wi th Jon’s close internal focalization on the 
here and now of the story. Thus, the focali zer can only be the covert narrator, the only 
narrative agent that has access to such a privileged view. (Nevertheless, Jon’s 
consciousness is focalized on: “The memory of her laughter warmed him” marks 
external focalization from within.) 
 A more obvious break from close internal  focalization on story time comes in the 
passage that finds Dany making love to her new husband, Khal Drogo, the leader of a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38
tribe of nomadic plainspeople called the Dothra ki. Like the Jon passage above, this one, 
too, concludes the chapter. Note the sudden shift in story ti me between the first and the 
second paragraph: 
 There is no privacy in the heart of the khalasar. Dany felt the eyes on her as she 
undressed him, heard the soft voices as she did the things that Doreah had told her to do. It 
was nothing to her. Was she not khaleesi? His were the only eyes that mattered, and when 
she mounted him she saw something there that she had never seen before. She rode him as 
fiercely as ever she had ridden her silver, an d when the moment of his pleasure came, Khal 
Drogo called out her name. 
 They were on the far side of the Dothraki sea when Jhiqui brushed the soft swell of 
Dany’s stomach with her fingers and said, “Khaleesi, you are with child.” 
 “I know,” Dany told her. 
 It was her fourteenth name day. (Martin 236) 
The now of aggressive love-making and the now of Dany’s softly swollen stomach are 
separated by at least two or three months of story time, wh ereas the rest of the chapter 
spans no more than a day. The intervening peri od, the travel across the plains, is simply 
omitted, marking a striking departure from the relatively slow pace that characterizes 
the chapter (and, indeed , the whole novel). While the narr ation up to and including the 
love-making scene is focalized from Dany’s internal perspective, the last three 
paragraphs stand somewhere between internal a nd external focalization. On the one 
hand, the dominance of internal focalization throughout the chapter, and the continued 
use of familiarizing denomination (“Dany”  rather than “Daenerys” or “Daenerys 
Targaryen”) suggest that the ending should be read as internally focalized. On the other 
hand, the spatially abstract qua lity of the closing moment (the physical scene is not 
described in any detail), the lack of in ternal perspective (Dany’s thoughts are not 
rendered), and the sudden shift in story time itself may evoke an ex ternal perspective. 
The closing segment actually reads more like a narratorial statement on pregnancy than 
a scenic rendering of pregnancy. Moreover, it is a dramatic statement: the sudden shift 
in time, together with the somber “It was her fourteenth name da y” (i.e., she is now 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
39
fourteen years old), end the ch apter with dramatic flourish. It is clearly a strategic move 
by the narrator, perhaps too overt to pass as internal focalization. 
 In Martin, such excursions into authorial narration are ofte n found either at the 
start of a chapter or at the ve ry end, as in the two examples above, and rarely span more 
than a paragraph or two. Their function is almost always the same: to dramatically 
accentuate the moment, and possibly to foreshadow what is to come. 
 It should be noted that the representati on of story time in Martin is, of course, 
subject to constant modulation of speed or  pace. Not everything is narrated in equal 
detail. Some actions and events are observed very closely and with attention to detail, 
while others are passed over with only curs ory scenic reflection. Some story time is 
always omitted or assumed to have passed, as it is neither possible nor desirable to 
count every atom as it falls on the mind, and sometimes story time simply seems to stop 
when enough description enters the narrati on. Much like any other modern novel, the 
narrative is fraught with accelerations and decel erations, ellipses and descriptive pauses 
(see Jahn N5.2.3.; Rimmon-Kenan 53). This m odulation is motivated by the reflector 
character’s interests on the one hand, and the needs of storytelling on the other. 
 The important point is that  in Martin this modulation is almost always embedded 
in internal focalization. It does not break the overall temporal synchrony because the 
framework of internal focalization does not allow it to spill into extended temporal 
summaries or authorial shifts in story time, that is, into temporal panchrony. Because the 
modulation is itself, as a rule , internally focalized, it cannot but adhere to the present of 
the focalizer. 
 In Leiber, the situation is much the sa me despite the external focalization. Even 
though accelerations and decelerations of story time, ellipses, and descriptive pauses are 
typically externally focalized, the focalization is mostly restricted to the present of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40
characters. To be sure, the temporal synchron y is not quite as close or scenic as in 
Martin, the modulations in pace tend to be more pronounced, and the representation of 
story time sometimes extends into panchrony through retrospective temporal summaries 
and authorial shifts. Nonetheless, Leiber’s narrative as a whole follows the actions and 
events as they unfold in present time. Even  the temporal summaries typically speed up 
the present rather than the past or the future. 
2.3. Knowledge and Reflection 
As mentioned earlier, Rimmon-Kenan distinguishes between two psychological aspects 
of focalization: “the cognitive and the emotiv e orientation of the focalizer towards the 
focalized” (80). The first aspect, cognitive  orientation, comprises the focalizer’s 
knowledge, beliefs, conjectures, and memory (i bid.). External focalization is here 
aligned with unrestricted knowledge whereas  internal focalizat ion corresponds to 
restricted knowledge (ibid.; see Stanzel 113, 126). A narrator-focalizer knows, in 
principle, “everything about the represented world, and when he restricts his knowledge, 
he does so out of rhetorical considerati ons” (Rimmon-Kenan 80). An internal focalizer, 
on the other hand, is necessarily restricted to his or her own subjective perspective, and 
can therefore know only so much (ibid.). 
 Although Rimmon-Kenan does no t explicitly make the point, I consider cognition 
to also include reflection. That is, cogniti on is here conceived as a markedly active 
mental process. More than mere knowledge, cognition is about knowing as a process of 
awareness and reflection. It is an act of consciousness. As su ch, it also includes, or at 
least overlaps with, perception of story sp ace and story time. Perception of space and 
time is not only informed by knowledge but also constitutes a kind of knowledge in its 
own right. Knowledge, in turn, is already a kind of perception. In short, to perceive is to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
41
know and to know is to perceive. The di stinction between spatial and temporal 
perception on the one hand, and cognition on the other is thus more a heuristic construct 
to help facilitate discussion, rather than a hard and fa st boundary between types of 
perception and focalization. 
2.3.1. Leiber 
Much like spatial focalizati on, focalization that themati zes knowledge and reflection 
comes in a variety of shapes and sizes in Le iber, spanning the entire divide between the 
external and the internal, including a good number of ambi guous cases that cannot be 
comfortably assigned to either pole. At the authorial end of the spectrum, we find the 
omniscient narrator elaborat ing on the story world, prov iding information that goes 
beyond the private knowledge of  any individual character.  The following presents a 
typical example of the jovial narrator opening a subsection with just such knowledge: 
Nehwon – a vast bubble leaping up for ever through the waters of eternity. Like airy 
champagne . . . or, to certain moralists, like a globe of stinking gas from the slimiest, most 
worm-infested marsh. 
 Lankhmar – a continent firm-seated on the solid watery inside of the bubble called 
Nehwon. With mountains, hills, towns, plains, a crooked coastline, deserts, lakes, marshes 
too, and grainfields – especially grainfields, source of the continent’s wealth, to either side 
of the Hlal, greatest of rivers. (Leiber, Swords 79) 
The quote begins an elaborate spatial zoom, complete with geographic exposition, that 
starts out with a short co mment on Nehwon, Leiber’s stor y world, and ends in an 
antechamber inside the Rainbow Palace in the City of Lankhmar (see Leiber, Swords 
79−80). In addition to sporting a panoramic overview that clearly transcends the 
perspective of any individua l character, the above passage also draws on world 
knowledge that can only be authorial: Nehwon is explicitly identified as “a vast bubble 
leaping up for ever through the waters of eter nity” with Lankhmar fi rmly seated on its 
“solid watery inside”. This is authorial information because the narrative has already 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42
                                                
established that, from the perspective of story world inhabitants, the bubble view is 
merely a “hypothesis currently favored by Lankhmar philosophers” rather than a 
popular truth (Leiber, Swords 12). Fafhrd, for example, believes that the world is 
located inside “the jewel-ceilinged skull of a dead god” (Leiber, Swords 25). (Note how 
the passage also echoes the narra tor’s characteristically playful, even satirical voice that 
further underscores the authoria l perspective: “Like airy ch ampagne . . . or, to certain 
moralists, like a globe of stinking gas”.) 
 A second authorial maneuver that is exte nsively used in Leiber is collective 
focalization on multiple minds in the proces s of cognition. Here the narrator focalizes 
on what two or more characters are thinki ng about or reflecting upon. That is, multiple 
minds are narrated as thinking the same thing. While the object of focalization may be 
figural knowledge and reflection, the ability  to simultaneously access the contents of 
multiple minds necessarily betrays an authorial perspective, a kind of authorial 
knowledge.
12 Consider, for example, the following  passage which finds Glipkerio and 
Samanda lounging about in Glipkerio’s Whip Room, “reminiscing and getting a tipsy 
glow on, to put them in the right mood” for torturing an insubordinate palace maid 
(Leiber, Swords 194). Observe how the two characters’ minds are focalized: 
Now, for the nonce neglecting all the rare and begemmed instruments of pain around them 
and blessedly forgetting the rodent menace to Lankhmar, their though ts had returned to 
simpler and happier days. Glipkerio, his pa nsy wreath awry and somewhat wilted, was 
saying with a tittering eagerness, ‘Do you recall when I brought you my first kitten to throw 
in the kitchen fire?’ (Leiber, 
Swords 195) 
Collective focalization on cognition is here marked by the phrases “blessedly forgetting 
the rodent menace to Lankhmar” and “their thoughts had returned to simpler and 
 
 
 
12 Arguably, any access to another’s consciousness is au thorial by default. However, in figural narration 
this narratorial authority is a covert and subdued on e. Figural narration is recuperated in terms of a 
direct access to another’s consciousness, rather than as authorially mediated access, which is the case 
with authorial narration. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43
happier days” (“neglecting” may or may not refer to a cognitive process yet is equally 
collective all the same). Both phrases cons true Glipkerio and Samanda as a kind of 
cognitive unit rather than as two individuals with independ ent minds. This is external 
focalization by definition. The authorial cast of the passage is accentuated by the subtle 
satire in the narrator’s focalization on Glipkerio: “his pansy wreath 
awry and somewhat 
wilted . . . a tittering eagerness”. Lankhmar’s overlord, with his shabby floral wreath 
and nervous manners, emerges as an effeminate and even ridiculous character, that is, as 
anything but lordly. Although th e narrator’s voice is not part icularly dis tinct in the 
passage, external focalization (c ollective focalization coupled with narratorial satire) is 
nevertheless quite pronounced. (The “blessedly” in the first sentence could, perhaps, be 
construed as a subjectivity marker evoking brief reflectorization (see page 50 below).) 
 Like collective focalization, consecutive fo calization is an authorial technique that 
also coincides with external focalization on cognition (see consecuti ve focalization on 
space in section 2.2.1. above). In consecutive focalization on cognition, the narrator 
moves between multiple inside views of char acters, presenting what various characters 
are thinking about or reflecting upon at di fferent locations. As with consecutive 
focalization on space, authorial agency is here implicit in the narrator’s privilege to shift 
the focus of focalization at will. This is a common technique in Leiber, and sometimes 
highly conspicuous, as in the following passage which begins  with Fafhrd, perched on 
the roof of a temple, watching as three ghouls on horseback join Lankhmar’s ancient 
mummy gods in their battle against the invading rats: 
 Seated on the three black horses were three tall skeletons gleaming white in the 
moonlight, and with a lover’s certainty he [Fafhrd] recognized the first as being 
Kreeshkra’s. 
 She might, of course, be seeking him out to slay him for his faithlessness. Nevertheless, 
as almost any other lover in like circumstances – though seldom, true, near the midst of a 
natural-supernatural battle – he grinned a rather egotistic grin. 
 He lost not a moment in beginning his descent. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
 Meanwhile Kreeshkra, for it was indeed she,  was thinking as she gazed at the Gods of 
Lankhmar. Well, I suppose brown bones are better t han none at all. Still, they seem a poor 
fire risk. Ho, here come more rats! What a filthy city! And where oh where is my 
abominable Mud Man?
 The black kitten mewed anxiously at the temple’s foot where he awaited Fafhrd’s 
arrival. (Leiber, Swords 213) 
The first three paragraphs are roughly an chored to Fafhrd’s cognitive and spatial 
perspective (indeed, the entire scene thus far has been externally focalized from within 
Fafhrd’s lofty perspective). The opening sentence of the second pa ragraph (“She might, 
of course, be seeking him out to slay him for his faithlessness”) actually approaches 
internal focalization in the empathic manner in which it paraphrases Fafhrd’s inner 
ruminations (note especially the emphatic “of course”). However, as Fafhrd begins his 
climb down, the focalization suddenly shif ts to Kreeshkra, and we are afforded a 
passing glimpse inside her mind via interi or monologue. The second and final, and 
equally sudden shift takes us to the black ki tten at the temple’s foot. The focalization on 
the kitten may not qualify as cognitive in orientation, and although the last paragraph 
eschews any distinction between  external focalization from within and from without on 
a purely textual level, the ove rall effect, to my mind, nevertheless evokes an anxious 
consciousness (“mewed anxiously” and “awaited” are enough to suggest mentation). 
 Despite courting internal focalization, however, the passage is clearly authorial in 
tone and texture. The second half of the second paragraph (“Nevertheless, as almost any 
other lover in like circumstances . . . he gri nned a rather egotistic grin.” (ibid.)) reads 
more like narratorial commentary and description than a rendering of what is going on 
inside Fafhrd’s mind. Also, while Kreeshkra’s thoughts are rendered verbatim in interior 
monologue, their framing is manifestly author ial: “Meanwhile Kreeshkra, for it was 
indeed she, was thinking” marks an authorial move that signals a shift in focalization 
(“Meanwhile”), explicitly sets up the interior monologue (“Kreeshkra . . . was 
thinking”), and even allows the narrator to confirm Fafh rd’s earlier recognition of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45
Kreeshkra (“it was indeed she”) (ibid.). Coupled with the pronounced consecutive 
focalization, and the norm of external focaliz ation already established for the scene (see 
Leiber, Swords 212−13), such discourse makes the narrator’s authority hard to miss. 
 Fixed external focalization from within, or  external focalization that sticks to a 
single consciousness rather than overtly  juggling multiple minds, is much more 
common in Leiber than either collective or  consecutive focalizati on. More often than 
not, the narrative is anchored to either Fafhrd  or the Mouser (or near enough as to make 
little difference). In terms of cognition, as well as in general, the prototypical narrative 
pattern is one that embeds an approximation or adoption of either character’s viewpoint 
within an authorially oriented frame. This is  especially true for the second half of the 
novel, in which Fafhrd and the Mouser, foll owing their adventure at sea, embark on 
their separate journeys, and the narrative begi ns to focus more closely and consistently 
on either one at a time. The following glimps e of the dreaming Mouser’s mind presents 
a characteristic example of a main character’s inner landscape as mediated through the 
authorial narrator’s external perspective: 
Now he slept the sleep of exhaustion, his mind just beginning to be tickled by dreams of the 
glory that would be his when, under the eyes of Glipkerio, he would prove himself Hisvin’s 
superior at blasting rats. His dreams did not take account of the fact that Hisvin could 
hardly be counted a blaster of rats, but rather their ally – unless the wily grain-merchant had 
decided it was time to change sides. (Leiber, 
Swords 115) 
The first sentence renders the Mouser’s mind from within in a relatively straightforward 
manner. While hardly internal focalization as such, the sentence adheres faithfully to the 
Mouser’s dreaming perspective: the sentence  reveals nothing that the Mouser himself 
would not know about his dreams while dr eaming them. However, the second sentence 
clearly spills over into narratorial commen tary: what the Mouser’s dreams fail to 
account for – that Hisvin is actually scheming with the rats – is knowledge that the 
Mouser does not yet possess. By definition, this is authorial knowledge. Indeed, the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46
opening “His dreams did not take account of th e fact” already states as much, and quite 
overtly to boot. 
 Both Stanzel and Rimmon-Kenan (who is drawing on Seymour Chatman’s signs 
of narratorial overtness) have identified this sort of mane uver, reporting something that 
a character did not know or th ink, as a distinctly authorial strategy (see Rimmon-Kenan 
99; Stanzel 197). It is perhaps a testimony to the figural tenden cies in Leiber that this 
device, the second most overt marker of narratorial presence (Rimmon-Kenan 99), finds 
very little use in The Swords of Lankhmar. 
 Reports of what will happen are similarly few and far between. Leiber’s narrator 
discloses his knowledge of the future only on the rare occasion when the reader could 
do with information about what will happen af ter the story ends, or  when the logic of 
suspense dictates a dramatic note. In the la tter case, the narrator’s authorial knowledge 
is usually suggested rather than made exp licit. For example, this dramatic insert 
interrupts a scene in which the Mouser, oblivious to the world around him, is engaged in 
ecstatic foreplay with Hisvet and Frix: “The Mouser might never have known what 
happened next – and it might have been a di rely different happening too – if it had not 
been that, never satisfied even with the mo st supreme ecstasy, he decided once more to 
disobey Hisvet’s explicit injunction and steal a glance at Frix” (Leiber, 
Swords 99). Frix, 
of course, is looking over the Mouser’s shoulder at the two assassins sneaking up on 
him, and it is only by chance that the Mouser divines this and is able to escape the trap. 
The opening clause (“The Mouser might never have known what happened next”) 
suggests authorial foreknowledge: the narrator already knows that which the Mouser is 
about to find out, that two assassins are about  to attack him. This foreshadowing is 
dramatically accentuated in the second clause (“and it might have been a direly different 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
47
happening too”) which implies that the assassi ns might have succeeded in killing the 
unsuspecting Mouser on the spot if not for his serendipitous disobedience. 
 Despite the authorially motivated openi ng clauses, however, the passage does not 
explicitly present au thorial knowledge: what might have happened is never elaborated 
upon. Moreover, the conditional “might” constr uctions suggest stra tegically limited 
omniscience rather than omniscience as such. In other words, the narrator’s aim is not to 
tell the reader what would have happened next had things gone differently for the 
Mouser (an unnecessary narrative act if ever there was one), but to build suspense by 
suggesting that things could have gone diff erently for him. Such subtly authorial 
narration tallies nicely with  the surrounding narrative which adheres closely to the 
Mouser’s restricted perspective: the ove rall figural perspectivism will most likely 
subsume the brief authorial insert in the reading process. 
 The following passage from the denouement of the rat invasion provides a less 
ambiguous example of authorial knowledge about the future: 
Their work done, the War cats  regathered at the place where Fafhrd had summoned them 
and there faded away even as they had earlier materialized. They were still thirteen, 
although they had lost one of their company, for the black kitten faded away with them, 
comporting himself like an apprentice member of  their company. It was ever afterwards 
believed, by most Lankhmarts, that the War Cats and the white skeletons as well had been 
summoned by the Gods 
of Lankhmar, whose reputation for horrid powers and dire activities 
was thereby bolstered, despite some guilty reco llections of their temporary defeat by the 
rats. (Leiber, Swords 225) 
From external focalization on the War Cats’ departure in present time, the narrative 
shifts briefly (“It was ever afterwards believed”) to collective focalization on the 
Lankhmarts’ subsequent (and mistaken) belief in the origins of th e cats and the three 
skeleton-like ghouls. This quick glimpse into the future caps th e already authorial 
orientation of the subsection of which it is a part. (The subsection is , in fact, the last 
panoramically narrated interlude to survey th e rat invasion.) Situated  as it is amongst 
external focalization, the glim pse, itself a doubly authorial maneuver, meshes with its 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48
narrative surroundings even more unobtrusively than the implicitly au thorial insert in 
the previous example. 
 The figural end of cognition also finds solid representation in Leiber, even though 
it remains subordinate to the authorial.  Here, the focalization on knowledge and 
reflection is internal, and thus  restricted to what the reflector character knows or is 
thinking about. Fafhrd’s private speculati ons about the invading army present a 
markedly figural example. Fafhrd knows only what Ningauble has told him, that 
Lankhmar has been invaded by “a fier ce host which outnumbers Lankhmar’s 
inhabitants by . . . fifty to one” and that there is “despe rate fighting going on in the 
streets” (Leiber, Swords 144). But when Fafhrd enters th e city under cover of darkness, 
he finds the streets before him empty and silent, with neither friend nor foe in sight: 
 Fafhrd felt spooked. Had the conquerors of Lankhmar already departed? – carrying off 
all its treasure and inhabitants in some unimaginably huge fleet or caravan? Had they shut 
up themselves and their gagged victims in the silent houses for some rite of mass torture in 
darkness? Was it a demon, not human army which had beset the city and vanished its 
inhabitants? Had the very earth gaped for victor and vanquished alike and then shut again? 
Or was Ningauble’s whole tale wizardly fl imflam? – yet even that least unlikely 
explanation still left unexplained the city’s ghostly desolation. 
 Or was there a fierce battle going on under his eyes at this very moment, and he by 
some spell of Ningauble or Sheelba unable to see, hear, or even scent it? – until, perchance, 
he had fulfilled the geas of the bells which Ningauble had laid on him. (Leiber, 
Swords 193) 
The passage reads like a faithful, if verbally  elaborate, rendering of questions running 
through Fafhrd’s perplexed mind. At no point does it transcend Fafhrd’s subjective 
knowledge about the supposed invaders. Fafhrd , of course, does not yet know that the 
invaders are actually Lankhmar’s own ambitious rats, that the rats have yet to launch 
their main attack, and that much of the hum an populace has been herded into specific 
parts of the city (which explains the “ghostly desolation”). Fafhrd’s mistaken notion 
about an invisible army marks one of th e novel’s most pronounced and consistently 
thematized epistemological gaps (see Leiber, 
Swords 193−94, 203−04). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49
 The gap exists only for the character, however. The reader, at this point, knows 
much more than Fafhrd: that the invaders are rats, that their main attack is yet to 
commence, and that the Lankhmarts have been lu red into particular areas so as to better 
contain their numbers. Fafhrd’s ruminations  clearly represent internally focalized 
cognition, but their perspectival effect is  a strangely subdued one. Why such a lengthy 
reflection when the reader already knows what is going on in Lankhmar? There are 
obviously no grounds for suspense as that would require the read er to know no more 
than Fafhrd, nor is there any dramatic irony to be mined from Fafhrd’s storyline that 
would justify the different knowledge states. In short, the restricted knowledge packs 
zero dramatic punch. At best, the passage se rves to set Fafhrd’s outlandishly wild 
imagination in comic relief against the more mundanely fantastic truth (i.e., an army of 
clever rats). But as a piece of figural narr ation, the passage is undone, its subjective 
force defused, by the authorial context that  has already informed the reader of 
everything necessary: the subj ectivity serves no significan t purpose. (For a Leiber 
passage that combines internal focalization on cognition with a solid dramatic function 
that stems from the reader knowing as little as the reflector character, see the morning-
after scene which finds Fafhrd in bed with the calf (Leiber, Swords 74−76).) 
 In Leiber, the reader generally knows more than the characters. Information that is 
pertinent to the plot is typical ly more readily available to the former than to the latter, 
namely Fafhrd and the Mouser who frequently find themselves fumbling in marked (and 
often comic) ignorance. As Stanzel observes, an authorial narrator “guarantees that all 
the information required to unde rstand the story will be made available to the reader as 
he needs it” (160, see 153 −54). Leiber’s narrator certainly follows the same pattern, 
whether through explicit authorial exposit ion or by shifting focalization between 
different characters and locations. Despite th e reflectoral representations of restricted 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50
                                                
knowledge, the overall knowledge structure in Le iber is clearly authorial. Indeed, the 
reliably informative authorial context may actually hamper such reflectoral 
representations, as in the above example. (The Fafhrd passage featuring the calf works 
so well because in it Fafhrd’s restricted knowledge is rooted in his equally restricted, in-
the-moment sensory perceptions which lit erally leave the reader in a similar 
“darkness”.) 
 Leiber’s narrative also sports a nu mber of ambiguous cases where cognitively 
oriented focalization seems to originate fr om a subjectivity located somewhere between 
the two ontologies of charac ter and narrator. The ambiguous story-internal perspective 
discussed under spatial fo calization describes the sa me phenomenon (see section 2.2.1. 
above). Both Stanzel and Fludernik have discussed this technique at length, and I will 
follow their example in calling it reflectorization. They define reflectorization in slightly 
different terms, with Fludernik reworking Stanzel’s original pr oposal into her own 
narratological model, yet the differences between them are negligible for my present 
purposes. Reflectorization is here defined mi nimally as focalization which projects an 
apparently story-internal position that approaches the subjec tive mindset or perspective 
of one or more characters in  the story world (Stanzel 168 −84, 198− 200; Fludernik, 
Narratology 179− 92, 201− 11, 213− 21).13 The resulting “metaconsciousness”, to use 
Stanzel’s term, is neither individualized e nough to correspond to any single character, 
nor external enough to corres pond exclusively to the aut horial narrator located, by 
definition, outside the story world (see St anzel 177). Reflectorization can thus be 
thought of as a covertly authorial mane uver that evokes a nonspecific focalizing 
 
 
 
13 The main difference between Stanzel’s original pr oposal and Fludernik’s revised one is that whereas 
the former explicitly attributes the reflectorized metaconsciousness to a narrator pretending to function 
as a figural medium, the latter considers this attribution to be an inevitable interpretative move rather 
than a textual reality as such (see Stanzel 170, 198; Fludernik, Narratology 182). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51
subjectivity on the story level (i.e., as external focaliza tion that mimics internal 
focalization). 
 In Leiber, reflectorization typically takes the form of a collective voice that 
empathically reflects the shared perspective of a group of characters, and it seems to be 
most common in the sea voyage section, possibl y eclipsing internal focalization as the 
dominant device for representing figural s ubjectivity. (It is not always possible to 
distinguish between external focalization, reflectorization, a nd internal focalization, as 
the techniques tend to bleed into one another in actual usage.) That the sea voyage 
section also collects all the characters in one place is probably no coincidence. The 
reduced necessity of the narrative to focus on individual characters provides an ideal 
platform for reflectorization as a collective voice, especially in an authorial narrative 
that displays distinct figural  tendencies. Reflectorization, after all, allo ws external 
focalization to shift toward  internal focalization wit hout completely siphoning away 
authorial privileges in the process. 
 The most interesting of Leiber’s refl ectorized passages, and possibly the most 
pronounced, is the first Karl Treuherz episode, which is also the former of only two 
passages in the novel to include footnotes (see Leiber, Swords 24−28). The focalization 
in the episode is complex. Besides the narrator ’s external observations, the episode also 
contains a number of inside views that ra nge from a page’s worth of focalization keyed 
to Fafhrd to brief authorial glimpses inside the Mouser and Slinoo r, a possible glimpse 
inside Hisvet, and a few exp licit shifts into collective perception. The overall effect, 
however, is one in which these shifts in focalization seem to fuse into a kind of 
collective story-internal focus on the main event: the inexplicable Karl Treuherz, a 
traveler from another world, and the two-headed dragon that he rides. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52
 The episode begins with Fafhrd, who is  closest to the dragon when it suddenly 
materializes out of the fog surrounding the ship. Fafhrd’s initial shock at seeing two 
monstrous heads strike out from  the fog is focalized externally by the narrator, but as 
Karl Treuherz, “a man dressed in  orange and purple” (Leiber, Swords 25), comes into 
view, the narrative begins to shift into a mode resembling internal focalization. Fafhrd is 
here staring at the man-on-a-dragon, and finds that it is all a bit too much for him: 
 There is a point of grotesque rie beyond which horror cannot go, but slips into delirium. 
Fafhrd had reached that point. He began to feel as if he were in an opium dream. 
Everything was unquestionably real, yet it had lost its power to horrify him acutely. 
 He noticed as the merest of quaint details that the two greenish yellow necks forked 
from a common trunk. 
 Besides, the gaudily garbed man or demon riding the larger head seemed very sure of 
himself, which might or might not be a good thing. Just now he was belaboring the smaller 
head, seemingly in rebuke, with a blunt-pointed, blunt-hooked pike he carried, and roaring 
out, either under or through his blue-red helmet, a gibberish that might be rendered as: 
 ‘ Gottverdammter Ungeheuer!’ (ibid.) 
The opening sentence is a gnomic statement about  the nature of grotesquerie, and hence 
authorial. The remainder of the paragraph and the short second paragraph describe in 
neutral, uninvolved terms what Fafhrd perceive s and feels, and theref ore also constitute 
external rather than internal focalization. However, the third paragraph already displays 
a pronounced figural orientation. The persp ective clearly belongs to someone on the 
scene who does not know who or what the strange rider is (“the gaudily garbed man or 
demon”), someone who is unsure of many things (“ seemed very sure of himself, which 
might or might not  be a good thing”, “ seemingly in rebuke”, “roaring out, either under 
or through his blue-red helmet”), who exists in the now of story time (“Just now he was 
belaboring”), and for whom the rider’s languag e is “gibberish”. But is this necessarily 
Fafhrd’s subjective perspective? 
 Fafhrd is certainly the only character av ailable who could, at this point, function 
as the reflector. Yet the rest of the episode  never reaches quite the same figural flavor 
that the third paragraph possesses. Furtherm ore, the narrative soon shifts focus from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
Fafhrd to the Mouser (who is literally “jealous of Fafhrd holding the center of the stage” 
(Leiber, Swords 26)). Fafhrd’s reflector status is thus momentary at best. The paragraph 
also contains zero reference to the observer.  The paragraph clearly presents a subjective 
rendering of the scene, yet the perceiving su bjectivity is not named, either by name or 
personal pronoun, nor is there any reference to  the act of perceiving itself. The person 
reference could arguably be borrowed from the “He” in the preceding paragraph, and in 
the reading process it probably is. But the lack of explicit denomination nevertheless 
gives the third paragraph a s ubtle quality of referentle ss subjectivity which suggests 
reflectorization. Finally, the concluding “a gibbe rish that might be rendered as” reads 
almost like a comment on the narration it self, momentarily pul ling the narrative 
perspective back toward the authorial (ibid.). 
 The fourth paragraph, the German “gi bberish”, interestingly enough serves both 
ends, supporting both the narrat or’s external perspective and a restricted story-internal 
one. The reason for this is that the para graph comes with a footnote: “‘Goddam 
monster!’ German is a language completely unknown in Nehwon” (ibid.). The footnote, 
of course, is an authorial maneuver by definition. As Rimmon-Kenan notes, “the very 
use of a footnote in a work of fiction is unusual and automatically draws attention to the 
presence of a narrator reflecting on his own narration” (101). Leiber’s footnote not only 
highlights the narrator’s presence, but also evokes his authorial knowledge: the narrator 
knows what is “completely unknown” in the st ory world, that the language is German, 
and that the short line translates as a curse.  The figural end, on the other hand, is served 
by the fact that the narrator’s omniscience is effectively relegated to the footnote, 
allowing the narrative proper to present Karl Treuherz’s word s as they appear to the 
characters: as gibberish (i.e., in German). Despite the authorial elements, the narrative is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54
strategically restricted to a “Nehwonian” horizon of cognition and knowledge (Fafhrd’s 
or otherwise). 
 The episode contains three further foot notes, all of which f unction like the first 
one, that is, as translations wh ich allow the narrative to render Karl Treuherz’s lines in 
their original “gibberish”. (The other sec tion in the novel to em ploy footnotes is the 
second Karl Treuherz episode (see Leiber, Swords 69−73). In that section, however, the 
footnotes merely function to  underscore the already prono unced narratorial presence 
and external focalization.) 
 The figural flavor continues throughout the episode. Besides Fafhrd, the narrative 
focuses on three other characters on the deck, with the odd complementary glimpse at or 
through collective consciousness. The Mouser’s mind is the first to be penetrated after 
Fafhrd’s: “Then, grown less fearful  of the two heads and somewhat jealous of Fafhrd 
holding the center of the stage, the Mous er leapt atop the taffrail” (Leiber, Swords 26; 
emphases added). Slinoor’s thoughts, too, re ceive brief attention:  “The description 
awakened a memory  in Slinoor, who managed to nerve himself to explain audibly” 
(Leiber, Swords 27; emphases added). Toward the end of the episode, the narrative shifts 
momentarily to Hisvet: “Hisvet, who had been listening from the middeck, chose that 
moment to climb the short ladder that led up to the afterdeck” (i bid.; emphasis added). 
The word “chose” could signal focalization on Hi svet’s inner decision to join the other 
characters at the ship’s stern. Between th e Slinoor and Hisvet segments, there is, 
furthermore, an offhand aside that presen ts collective focalization: “The man-demon 
was voluble in his thanks and after que stioning Slinoor closely announced ( rather to 
everyone’ s relief) that he was now ready to turn his search eastward with new hope” 
(ibid.; emphasis added). Finally, the episode ends with what can only be reflectorized 
focalization on space: “Then the two-headed monster with its orange-and-purple mahout 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55
could be dimly seen moving around Squid’s stern eastward into thicker fog, the man-
demon gibbering gentlier what might have been an excuse and farewell: ‘Es tut mir sehr 
leid! Aber dankeschoen, dankeschoen! ’” (ibid.). Here, the spatially restricted “could be 
dimly seen” corresponds to no single character, and must therefore belong to no one and 
everyone (much like the “now and again the sun’s rays twinkled on a peering eye or 
silvered fingernail” that was discussed in section 2.2.1. above). The effect is enforced by 
the conditional “what might have been an excuse and farewell” that extends the 
reflectorized perspective. 
 Even though none of these character mome nts develops into in ternal focalization 
as such, there is an unmistakable figural flavor to the entire episode. Between the Fafhrd 
segment and the three minor character segm ents, the collective perspectives and the 
footnoted omniscience, there is enough figural counterweight to the authorial context to 
suspend the episode between external and in ternal focalization. (Even the denomination 
is consistently subjective in that it dela ys naming “Karl Treuherz” until he explicitly 
introduces himself to the other character s.) The narrative perspective seems to 
correspond roughly to Fafhrd’s, and later to that of anyone and everyone on the ship’s 
deck, yet it is clearly never re stricted to any particular character by way of fully fledged 
internal focalization. This he sitation between the authorial and the figural results in 
what could be described as a collective Nehw onian interpretative horizon. By explicitly 
casting the inexplicable Karl Treuherz as an  alien Other, it comes to implicitly include 
anyone and everyone on the ship. 
2.3.2. Martin 
In Martin, unsurprisingly enough, there is no  reflectorization, cogni tively oriented or 
otherwise. Nor is there much in the way of  authorial knowledge. As with spatial and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56
temporal focalization, cognitively oriented foca lization in Martin is  restricted almost 
exclusively to internal focal ization. Both collective and consecutive focalization are 
nonexistent. Issues relating to knowledge and reflection are thus markedly figural in 
their narrative form, much more so than the corresponding elements in Leiber. In 
Martin, the reader typically knows no more than the reflector characters, which is to say 
that the reader is usually left in the same epistemological darkness as the reflectors. 
(The astute reader will, of course, gue ss many things, but these guesses are not 
explicitly addressed until a reflector comes by with th e appropriate knowledge, or 
hazards a similar guess.) 
 Martin’s reflector characters often fo calize the same object differently in 
accordance with their individual perspectives  (and cognitive limitations). The different 
perspectives qualify and relati vize one another, contrastin g the characters in revealing 
ways, and produce a dynamic and multilayered view of the story world and the objects 
it contains. Take, for example, the young knight  whom Ser Gregor kills in the Hand’s 
tourney. The young knight’s seemingly accident al death is initially focalized through 
Sansa, who is watching the tourney from the gallery: “The most terrifying moment of 
the day came during Ser Gregor’s second joust, when his lance rode up and struck a 
young knight from the Vale under the gorget with  such force that it  drove through his 
throat, killing him instantly. The youth fell not  ten feet from where Sansa was seated” 
(Martin 295). Sansa’s focalization identifies the knight simply as “a young knight”. To 
her, he is just another knight without a name (unlike the infamous Ser Gregor the 
Mountain, whom everyone knows). 
 The narrative continues with Sansa’s al most morbid fascination with the dead 
youth on the ground: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
The point of Ser Gregor’s lance had snapped off in his neck, and his life’s blood flowed out 
in slow pulses, each weaker than the one befo re. His armor was shiny new; a bright streak 
of fire ran down his outstretched arm, as the steel caught the light. Then the sun went 
behind a cloud, and it was gone. His cloak was blue, the color of the sky on a clear 
summer’s day, trimmed with a border of crescent moons, but as his blood seeped into it, the 
cloth darkened and the moons turned red, one by one. 
 Jeyne Poole wept so hysterically that Septa Mordane finally took her off to regain her 
composure, but Sansa sat with her hands folded in her lap, watching with a strange 
fascination. She had never seen a man die before. She ought to be crying too, she thought, 
but the tears would not come. Perhaps she had used up all her tears for Lady and Bran. It 
would be different if it had been Jory or Ser Rodrik or Father, she told herself. The young 
knight in the blue cloak was nothing to her, some stranger from the Vale of Arryn whose 
name she had forgotten as soon as she heard it. And now the world would forget his name 
too, Sansa realized; there would be no songs sung for him. That was sad. (Martin 295−96). 
The close focus on the dead knight’s “shiny new” armor catching the light of the sun 
and his beautiful blue cloak slowly drinking his blood, coupled with Sansa’s silent, cold 
reflection on death as her hysterical best frie nd is taken away, clearly make this passage 
about Sansa’s encounter with death in general, rather than with the young knight’s death 
in particular. Indeed, as a person, he is “nothing to her, some stranger . . . whose name 
she had forgotten as soon as she heard it.” Sansa knows next to nothing about the 
knight, and he therefore remains merely a na meless nobody. It is death, rather than the 
dead person, that she watches “with a strang e fascination.” There is  nothing to suggest 
that the knight is in any way special, that  his death was anything but an unfortunate 
jousting accident, a “sad” affair. 
 The first hint of a sinister subtext to the young knight’s death comes toward the 
end of the same chapter, when the Hound, Ser Gregor’s brother, lets slips in his drunken 
stupor that Gregor knew that  the young knight’s gorget was not properly fastened, and 
that “‘Gregor’s lance goes where Gregor wants it to go’” (Martin 302). But Sansa, a girl 
of eleven who is here mostly terrified of  the Hound and his badly scarred face, makes 
nothing of this, much less questions him about it, and thus the narrative never lingers on 
the Hound’s words. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58
 It is not until the next chapter, with E ddard Stark, Sansa’s father, as the reflector, 
that the reader discovers who the young knight was, and what the sinister subtext is. The 
chapter opens with Eddard (“Ned”) studyi ng the young knight’s body af ter it has been 
prepared for burial: 
 In the pale dawn light, the young knight looked as though he were sleeping. He had not 
been handsome, but death had smoothed his rough-hewn features and the silent sisters had 
dressed him in his best velvet tunic, with a high collar to cover the ruin the lance had made 
of his throat. Eddard Stark looked at his face, and wondered if it had been for his sake that 
the boy had died. Slain by a Lannister bannerman before Ned could speak to him; could 
that be mere happenstance? He supposed he would never know. 
 “Hugh was Jon Arryn’s squire for four years,” Selmy went on. (Martin 305) 
The young knight, Hugh, used to squire for Jon Arryn, Eddard’s predecessor as the 
King’s Hand, who died under mysterious ci rcumstances, and whose death Eddard has 
been investigating. Eddard suspects the Lannisters, and Hugh was his last hope to 
implicate them. Ser Gregor, of course, is the Lannister bannerman who killed Hugh. The 
young knight thus turns out to be a likely pawn in a deadly conspiracy. However, this is 
not actually verified. Eddard, like the reader , can, at this point, only guess at Hugh’s 
possible role based on what li ttle he knows (which, in fact, is even less than what the 
reader knows, since Eddard was not privy to the conversation between Sansa and the 
Hound). 
 What is significant here is how consiste nt internal focalization allows Martin to 
develop a seemingly innocent scene (a random if ghastly accident witnessed by one 
character) into something more meaningful (a likely assassination suspected by another 
character). The fact that this “meaningfulness” is suggested rath er than explicitly 
established only enforces the figural quali ty of the narrative: it highlights the 
fundamentally restricted nature of a reflect or character’s cognitive perspective and the 
provisional quality of subjective knowledge. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59
 Another even more subtly woven stor y strand involving a gap runs through the 
entire narrative. (Indeed, it extends well beyond the present novel, its repercussions 
possibly spanning the entire series.) This stra nd begins with the one historical event 
from which so much in the story present seems to derive: Rhaegar Targaryen’s supposed 
abduction and rape of Lyanna Stark, and the fateful rebellion this action sparked. What 
really took place between Rhaegar and Lyanna , both since deceased, and what the full 
outcome was, constitute a central epistemol ogical gap in the narrative. Not only is this 
gap among the most obscure in the novel, alwa ys suggested rather than spelled out, it is 
also left completely unresolved (see Martin 30, 43 −44, 110− 16, 199, 232, 380− 81, 
424−25, 631, 668, 710, 773). I will not discuss it at length, though, as this would only 
reiterate the point I have al ready made with the previous  example. However, I will 
invite the reader to ponder if Rhaegar truly was the monster offici al history makes him 
out to be; if Rhaegar and Lyanna were not, in fact, lovers; if the mysterious promise 
which Lyanna pledged Eddard to make as  she was dying might not have involved an 
illegitimate child with Rhaegar ; and if this child might not actually be Jon, Eddard’s 
bastard son whom he supposedly fathered during the rebellion. Mar tin’s narrator, of 
course, provides no obvious answers. 
 Figural cognition in Martin is also fre quently foregrounded on a more local level, 
and in a more pronounced form, in a reflec tor character’s subjective and distinctive 
perspective on specific objects and events as informed by his or her cognitive (and 
emotive) horizon. A case in point is Bran’s petulant mindset after most of his family and 
friends have been called away from Winterfell, leaving the crippled and still-recovering 
Bran, a boy of eight, very much alone: 
 It would never be the way it had been, he knew. The crow had tricked him into flying, 
but when he woke up he was broken and the world was changed. They had all left him, his 
father and his mother and his sisters and even his bastard brother Jon. His father had 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60
promised he would ride a real horse to King’s Landing, but they’d gone without him [. . . .] 
to Bran it felt as if they had all died while he had slept . . . or perhaps Bran had died, and 
they had forgotten him. Jory and Ser Rodrik and Vayon Poole had gone too, and Hullen and 
Harwin and Fat Tom and a quarter of the guard. 
 Only Robb and baby Rickon were still here, and Robb was changed. He was Robb the 
Lord now, or trying to be. He wore a real sword and never smiled. His days were spent 
drilling the guard and practicing his swordplay, making the yard ring with the sound of steel 
as Bran watched forlornly from his window. (Martin 239) 
The passage renders Bran’s perceived ab andonment poignantly. His perspective is 
clearly that of a child, and thus – as a child – he only focuses on his own needs. For 
Bran, then, it is all about him having been left behind (“They had all left him”, “they’d 
gone without him”, “they had forgotten him”). He was to have accompanied his father to 
the king’s court, but then he fell while c limbing the tower, and “when he woke up he 
was broken and the world was changed.” Almost everyone he cares about is gone, and 
those that remain seem changed. It is a terrible reality to wake up to, and Bran’s reaction 
seems authentically a child’s reaction. 
 Bran, of course, does not know, or fails to understand, that his family and friends 
left while he was in a coma because they  had no other choice. Robb, in turn, has his 
hands full in running Winterfell in their parents’ absence (as Bran will come to realize 
toward the end of the chapter (see Martin 248 −49)). Bran’s perspective is skewed not 
only by his childish bitterness at the world (echoed in the resentful denomination of 
Robb as “Robb the Lord” (Martin 239)), but also by his limited knowledge and 
understanding of events. Yet notice how the passage never explicitly states Bran’s 
ignorance; rather, it is implicitly enacted in  the narration. That is, the passage presents 
“thoughts which either reveal a lack of knowledge or are evoked by such a lack” 
(Stanzel 197). The result is a truthful, distinctly subjective rendering of an 
eight-year-
old’s inner confusion over a world that seems to have abandoned him in his blight. Such 
pronounced internal focalization is highly typi cal of Martin, especi ally with the child 
reflectors (Bran, Arya, and Sansa). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61
 A similar, if less frequent, figural phenomenon tracks a reflector character’s 
changing awareness (or knowledge  state) as informed by his or her immediate sensory 
perceptions. More specifically, the reflector ch aracter’s full awareness of an object is 
delayed by a mistaken or impaired first impression. Observe how  Sansa’s internal 
focalization on the “scrawny” girl changes by the end of this passage: 
 Beyond, in a clearing overlooking the river, they came upon a boy an d a girl playing at 
knights. Their swords were wooden sticks, broom handles from the look of them, and they 
were rushing across the grass, swinging at each other lustily. The boy was years older, a 
head taller, and much stronger, and he was pre ssing the attack. The girl, a scrawny thing in 
soiled leathers, was dodging and managing to get her stick in the way of most of the boy’s 
blows, but not all. When she tried to lunge at him, he caught her stick with his own, swept it 
aside, and slid his wood down hard on her fingers. She cried out and lost her weapon. 
 Prince Joffrey laughed. The boy looked around, wide-eyed and startled, and dropped his 
stick in the grass. The girl glared at them, sucking on her knuckles to take the sting out, and 
Sansa was horrified. “
Arya?” she called out incredulously. (Martin 149−50) 
The revelation that the scraw ny girl in dirty clothes is actually Arya, Sansa’s younger 
sister, is delayed because Sansa’s recognition of her is delayed. Whether it is because of 
all the dirt covering Arya, or the outrageous f act that she is “playing at knights” with a 
commoner, Sansa simply fails to cognize the “scrawny thing in soiled leathers” as her 
sister. It is only after she has observed the scene play itself out that she comes to the 
sudden and shocking realization as to who the girl really is. The narration, entrenched in 
Sansa’s subjectivity, in no way betrays th is. The clever reader may guess what the 
reflector character is yet to realize, but the narrative itself filters everything through 
Sansa’s in-the-moment understanding of what she sees. Indee d, there is a deft figural 
touch to the narration that renders Sansa’s horror (“and Sansa was horrified”) before she 
is actually able to articulate the cause of  this horror by incredulously calling out her 
sister’s name: Sansa’s momentary disorientation is projected into the reading process by 
having the effect immediately precede the cause in the text itself. 
 In Martin, the reader plainly depends on the reflector characters for access into the 
story world. Since much of this access ha s a pronounced subjective bent, the reader’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62
attempts at forming a clear picture of char acters and events are continuously thwarted, 
even subverted. Where Leiber’s narrator typica lly sees to it that th e reader has all the 
pertinent information, Martin ’s narrator frequently omits  or obscures precisely the 
pertinent bits. Or rather, the pertinent bits are omitted and obscured as a result of the 
reflectors being either misinformed or uninf ormed (Martin’s narrator is, after all, a 
covert narrator). In this, Martin clearly follows what Stanzel considers a central 
principle of figural narration, that through a reflector: 
a section of the fictional reality is isolated and spotlighted in such a way that all the details 
important for the reflector-character become di scernible. Outside of this sector, however, 
there is darkness and uncertainty, a large ar ea of indeterminacy, which the reader can 
penetrate only here and there by drawing inferences from the illuminated sector. (Stanzel 
153) 
Stanzel’s metaphor of illuminated darkness fits Martin almost to a tee. 
 Despite Martin’s preference for such illuminated darkness, however, there are 
passages which threaten to undermine the fi gural logic of restricted knowledge and 
reflection. By and large, these are related eith er to exposition or, to a lesser extent, to 
illicit omissions in internal focalization. Pronounced exposition is something of a given 
in fantasy as fantasy narrati ves typically need to set up not only a story but a strange 
new world as well. Authorially oriented narratives, Leiber’s among them, obviously 
accommodate exposition better than figurally oriented ones, where the narration cannot, 
in principle, steer too far from what the reflector character would know and reflect upon 
at any given moment. Since Martin’s story world is among the most richly detailed and 
textured in the genre, conflicts between exposition and realistic figural perspectivism 
are only to be expected. This is not to say that all exposition in Martin has an authorial 
flavor. On the contrary, much of the story wo rld is not so much se t up as sketched with 
small, subtle strokes, with the exposition carefully sprinkled across the narrative, 
making it all but imperceptible. My focus here, however, is on expositional passages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63
that are not so covertly backgrounded. (As exposition, such passages are analogous to 
the subjective flashbacks discussed in section 2.2.2. above, which provide necessary 
information while camouflaging themselves as reminiscence by a reflector character.) 
 Martin’s narrative includes numerous brief instances that fall somewhere between 
overt and covert exposition. For example, the following pa ssage, an excerpt from a 
conversation between Dany and his brother about a silk gown, ends in a sentence that is 
clearly expository in nature yet hardly a departure from the internal focalization that 
characterizes the passage as a whole: 
 Dany touched it. The cloth was so smooth that it seemed to run through her fingers like 
water. She could not remember ever wearing anyt hing so soft. It frightened her. She pulled 
her hand away. “Is it really mine?” 
 “A gift from the Magister Illyrio,” Viserys said, smiling. Her brother was in a high 
mood tonight. “The color will bring out the violet  in your eyes. And you shall have gold as 
well, and jewels of all sorts. Illyrio has promised. Tonight you must look like a princess.” 
 A princess, Dany thought. She had forgotten what that was like. Perhaps she had never 
really known. “Why does he give us so much?” she asked. “What does he want from us?” 
For nigh on half a year, they had lived in the magister’s house, eating his food, pampered 
by his servants. Dany was thirteen, old enough to know that such gifts seldom come 
without their price, here in the free city of Pentos. (Martin 28) 
The first two paragraphs represent straight forward internal focalization by Dany (with 
only a hint of exposition in “Her brother” which serves to qualify Viserys). The third 
paragraph opens with interior monologue, fo llowed by Dany’s internal focalization on 
her own thoughts (note especia lly the empathic “Perhaps” in “Perhaps she had never 
really known”). The penultimate sentence is informative in explaining the siblings’ 
situation, yet it is easily recuperable as reminiscence sparked by Dany’s verbalized 
concerns over Illyrio’s seemingly altruistic generosity. 
 The closing sentence, however, seems to mix expository external focalization with 
internal focalization. The first two clauses (“Dany was thirteen, old enough to know that 
such gifts seldom come without their pr ice” (ibid.)) do not sound like something the 
character herself would be thinking about. Fo r one, Dany’s age is given information for 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64
                                                
her, and thus hardly in need of conscious acknowledgment. Second, “old enough to 
know” calls to mind a conventional judgment about someone else rather than one’s own 
evaluation of oneself. In short, it is difficu lt not to see the narrator at work here. The 
sentence clearly begins with an expository gesture that highlights the narrator’s role in 
providing information. 14 Yet the sentence also betr ays an unmistakable figural 
orientation: it continues the familiariz ing denomination (“Dany”) which suggests 
internal focalization, and the final clause lo cates the narrative perspective inside story 
space (“here in the free city of Pent os”), although even here th ere is a subtle trace of 
convenience in where it locates it (Pentos should, af ter all, be a non-issue for Dany who 
has been living there for quite some time). The exposition, then, marks an authorial 
touch on an otherwise figural canvas. 
 The exposition itself is understandable as this is the first chapter to feature Dany’s 
character, and her corner of the story world (w hich she is the sole reflector character to 
focalize firsthand). Dany’s age in particular is something the reader simply must know 
in order for the subsequent events to have their full dramatic impact (e.g., Dany’s 
arranged marriage to Khal Drogo, her painful nights in th eir marriage bed, the sudden 
responsibilities she is forced to shoulder). 
 Besides such fleeting instances of au thorially motivated exposition, Martin’s 
narrative also includes its sh are of extended passages where the expository function is 
more conspicuous. The majority of these are subjective flashbacks, which, despite being 
embedded in figural narration, signal authorial agency by  the convenient way they 
punctuate the narrative with per tinent information (see section 2.2.2. above). Another 
device that serves exposition is to have a reflector character overhear or listen to another 
 
 
 
14 For comparison, omit the expository beginning and read the sentence simply as “Such gifts seldom 
came without their price, here in the free city of Pentos.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
65
character explain something. If the explaining is rendered in direct discourse, that is, as 
quoted speech, then the authoria l touch can be negligible, since the information is more 
easily recuperable as simple aural perception (e.g., the Hound’s drunken words to Sansa 
(see page 57 above)). If, on the other hand, the spe ech is represented in indirect 
discourse, as part of the narration, the refl ector’s subjective reactions become marked: 
the speech event, a paraphrase of the original , is now part of the reflector’s internal 
landscape. It is an interpreta tion, a reflection, or at least it should rightly be one (since 
the narration is supposed to embody the reflector’s perspective). 
 The following is an example of just such an extended passage of exposition 
through indirect discourse. What is remarkable about it is that it reads more like a 
neutral record, a narrative w ithin a narrative, than subjective perception by a reflector 
character. The passage involves Jon, the reflector, listening to Samwell Tarly recount his 
life history and how it was th at he ended up in the Night’s Watch. Samwell’s account 
runs for about two pages and is clearly de marcated, its beginning and ending explicitly 
cued to set it off from the surrounding narrative: 
After a long while Samwell Tarly began to talk, and Jon Snow listened quietly, and learned 
how it was that a self-confessed coward found himself on the Wall. 
 . . . . 
 Sam told the tale in a calm, dead voice, as if it were something that had happened to 
someone else, not to him. And strangely, Jon thought, he did not weep, not even once. 
When he was done, they sat together and listened to the wind for a time. There was no other 
sound in all the world. (Martin 267−69) 
The opening cue in particular smacks of exte rnal focalization. In addition to a subtle 
flashforward that effectively covers the enti re scene (“Jon Snow . . . learned how it was 
that a self-confessed coward found himself on the Wall”),  the opening also includes 
conspicuously formal denomination (“Samwel l Tarly”, “Jon Snow”). Such reference 
reflects neither Jon’s obvious familiarity with himself, nor his growing familiarity with 
Sam. Both the flashforward and the denomination plainly evoke a narrating agency. By 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66
comparison, the ending appears to veer toward  internal focalization: the familiarizing 
denomination (“Sam”, “Jon”) together with th e subjectivity markers (“as if it were”, 
“strangely, Jon thought”) recall Jo n as the reflector. But note that even here there is a 
trace of authorial agency in how the narr ative simultaneously closes and summarizes 
Sam’s story: “Sam told the tale in a calm, dead voice . . . . he di d not weep, not even 
once.” Not only does this cue closure, but it also constitutes a retrospective temporal 
summary that effectively retells the scene, with the focus now on qualitative aspects 
rather than thematic ones. (Indeed, this retelling includes precisely the kind of 
perceptual information about Sam’s act of narration that the initial rendering lacks.) 
Together, the beginning and ending collapse th e linear flow of story time, accentuating 
the separation between Sam’s story and the surrounding narrative. 
 The expository function of the passage is even more apparent in the complete lack 
of internal focalization in the passage proper: the narration does not mark Sam’s story as 
filtered through Jon’s consciousness. Apart from one brief direct discourse rendering of 
Sam’s speech in the middle, the passage es chews any identification of a listening 
subjectivity. For the most part, Sam’s story reads like this: 
Whatever pride his lord father might have felt at Samwell’s birth vanished as the boy grew 
up plump, soft, and awkward. Sam loved to listen to music and make his own songs, to 
wear soft velvets, to play in the castle kitchen beside the cooks, drinking in the rich smells 
as he snitched lemon cakes and blueberry tarts. His passions were books and kittens and 
dancing, clumsy as he was. But he grew ill at  the sight of blood, and wept to see even a 
chicken slaughtered. A dozen masters-at-arms came  and went at Horn Hill, trying to turn 
Samwell into the knight his father wanted. (Martin 268) 
There is nothing here to suggest that Jon is lis tening to this, that this is his internalized 
rendering of Sam’s words. Rather, it is as though the narrative simply omits Jon as an 
interpretative layer, and paraphrases Sam’s st ory “as is”. This neutral quality stems, in 
part, from the fact that the narration be trays neither marked empathy nor marked 
antipathy for Sam’s situation. Which is to say that there are hints of both, but that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
neither overshadows the other (e.g., “plump, soft, and awkward” can  be construed as 
negative characterization, while “drinking in the rich smells” clearly puts an empathetic 
spin on Sam’s propensity for culinary delights). That Sam’s story mostly reads as a 
straightforward biographical summary only enfor ces this apparent ne utrality. If Jon is 
the listener, then this is only because the ope ning cue explicitly establishes him as such 
(“Jon Snow listened” (Martin 267)). 
 It is actually Sam himself who becomes the listener toward the end: the story 
climaxes in a longish passage of  direct discourse, complete with a scenic context, that 
presents his father’s fateful ultimatum to him (see Martin 268−69). Sam thus becomes a 
listener, though not an  internal focalizer, inside his own story. Such a scenic ending 
together with the apparently neutral, summative narration nearly turns the entire episode 
into an actual temporal shift. Even t hough the beginning and ending cues bracket the 
scene as Jon-listening-to-Sam, a straining of figural logic is evident. The lack of 
subjective reflection by Jon shifts the thematic focus on new information: Sam’s story is 
primarily expository in function. It is designed to flesh out Sam’s character, and to elicit 
the reader’s sympathy by the matter-of-fact ma nner it presents his father’s atrocious 
treatment of him. (It is a testament to the covert narrator’s figural ethics that this 
treatment is never explicitly judged as atrocious for the reader.) 
 It bears repeating that exposition in Martin is always embedded in a figural 
context. No matter how conspicuous the aut horial aspect of expos ition, an expository 
passage in Martin is always recuperable as part of a reflector character’s consciousness, 
even if only just. 
 Besides explicitly cuing passages as reminiscence or such, if Martin’s narrator 
suddenly presents information that the reader  would not expect th e reflector to know, 
the exposition is typically tagged with a br ief explanation that rationalizes the new 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68
information in realistic terms. For instan ce, Catelyn’s knowledge of Moreo’s seafaring 
past is here justified by reference to an earlier discussion: “He’d been plying the narrow 
sea for thirty years, he’d told her, as oarman, quartermaster, and finally captain of his 
own trading galleys. The Storm Dancer  was his fourth ship, and his fastest, a two-
masted galley of sixty oars” (Martin 165). The “he’d told her” does little to camouflage 
the exposition, but it does naturalize it as plausible knowledge for Catelyn to possess. 
 Finally, since authorial flavor is relative to narrative context, what is overtly 
authorial in Martin may well be only lightly authorial in Leiber. Unlike Leiber, Martin’s 
narrative never fully breaks into authorial knowledge and reflection. In Martin, authorial 
exposition is a matter of conspicuously convenient informat ion or the backgrounding of 
internal focalization, or both. At no point does Martin’s narrator actually step in to 
explain things for the reader in his own voice. 
 Illicit omissions in internal focalization constitute another maneuver in Martin that 
puts a strain on the figural narration. This is a dramatic technique that violates figural 
logic by withholding information that the reflector character is sure to know. In essence, 
the narrator briefly suspends internal focalization, cutting off the reader’s access into the 
reflector’s consciousness, and betraying his own authority in the process. This technique 
is an offshoot of the more general phenomenon  of paralipsis: “sayi ng too little” in the 
context of the established narrative situati on (Jahn N3.3.15.). For example, there is a 
subtle paralipsis in the following passage which finds Jon explaining to his fellow 
recruits how it is that they will help Sam survive the training grounds: 
“Listen to me,” Jon said into the quiet, and he told them how it was going to be. Pyp backed 
him, as he’d known he would, but when Halder spoke up, it was a pleasant surprise. Grenn 
was anxious at the first, but Jon knew the words to move him. One by one the rest fell in 
line. Jon persuaded some, cajoled some, sham ed the others, made threats where threats 
were required. At the end they had all agreed . . . all but Rast. (Martin 270) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69
Although the surrounding narrative is  restricted to Jon’s pers pective, the narrator here 
strategically omits the one cruc ial piece of information that J on is sure to know as he is 
the one who spells it out to the others: what the plan is. The narrative simply states that 
Jon “told them how it was going to be.” The na rrator violates his own rule of internal 
focalization by denying access to pr ecisely that piece of scenic information that internal 
focalization would reveal. The revelation itself  is delayed until the narrative returns to 
the training grounds a few paragraphs later, a nd the narrator is able to show Jon’s plan 
in action. Providing the pertinent informati on beforehand would obviously have spoiled 
the surprise. Hence the shift into what can only be covert external focalization. Note 
also how the authorial orient ation in the above passage is  supported by the summative 
narration on the one hand, and offset by the familiarizing denomination and the lack of a 
distinct narratorial voice on the other. (Indee d, Martin’s narrator does not really have a 
distinct voice of his own.) Paralipsis is a rare phenomenon in Martin, no doubt due to 
the strong figural current that runs through the novel. 
2.4. Conclusion 
As the above analysis shows, Leiber and Ma rtin display markedly different tendencies 
in their handling of consciousness and narrati ve perspective. Internal focalization is 
clearly the rule in Martin, where story sp ace and story time are almost always rendered 
through a reflector character’s subjective pers pective, and where the representation of 
cognition is almost always figurally motivate d. There are, of course, moments when the 
normally covert narrator seems to step in, and external focalization seems to take over, 
but these are few and far between, and typi cally discreet. Indeed, such moments are 
often so unobtrusive that th e surrounding internal focalization subsumes them in the 
reading process, causing the reader to eith er gloss over them, or  interpret them as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70
internal rather than extern al focalization. In Marti n, perceptual and cognitive 
focalization clearly coincide with a figural narrative situation. 
 Leiber, in contrast, presents a more complicated case. To be sure, the framework 
in the narrative is authorial. This is evident not only in the overall dominance of external 
focalization and narratorial omniscience, but also in the diversity  of approaches to 
rendering story space, story time, and fic tional cognition. In Leib er, focalization on 
space ranges from panoramic and consecutive to reflectorized and internal; focalization 
on time runs the gamut from temporal summaries to close identity with a character’s 
subjective experience in time; and focalization on know ledge and reflection spans the 
entire spectrum from omniscient to reflec torized to figurally restricted. Only an 
authorial narrator can display such variety. Yet it is precisely this variety, and the 
substantial amount of figural perspectivism that mark Leiber’s novel as an authorial 
narrative 
with distinct fi gural tendencies . Leiber’s use of reflectorization in particular 
highlights the authorial narrator’s predilectio n for greater closeness to the characters 
than what authorial narration necessitates. (This is especially true with Fafhrd and the 
Mouser whom the narrator treats by turns with obvious sympathy and playful irony.) An 
authorial narrative situation dominates in Le iber, but the novel is clearly not as strongly 
entrenched in it as Martin’s novel is in a figural narrative situation. 
 It should be noted that the figural te ndencies in Leiber need not automatically 
violate the authorial framework. Narratorial om niscience, for example, is hardly ever 
consistently sustained throughout an authoria l narrative (Stanzel 126). Instead, the 
narrator’s unrestricted knowledge typically alte rnates with representations of restricted 
knowledge attributable to a story-internal c onsciousness (ibid.). In other words, internal 
focalization certainly has its place in aut horial narratives as well (see also section 1.4. 
above). Still, there is no denying the substantial figural perspectivism in Leiber. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71
2.5. Afterword: Emotion and Ideology 
Rimmon-Kenan discusses two further aspects of focalization: the emotive component, 
the other half of the psychological facet, and the ideological facet. In terms of emotive 
orientation, external focal ization yields objective or  uninvolved narration, whereas 
internal focalization involves subjectively colored,  involved narration (Rimmon-Kenan 
81). The ideological facet concerns a standard of norms against which characters, events 
and objects in the narrative are evaluated (Rimmon-Kenan 82 −83). The ideological 
opposition between external and internal fo calization manifests as the difference 
between a single dominant narrator persp ective on the one hand, and a plurality of 
autonomous character perspectives on the other (Rimmon-Kenan 83). 
 As I have already stated, I will not anal yze emotive and ideological focalization in 
Leiber and Martin, because I do not believe th at such an analysis would reveal anything 
new about the overarching narrative patterns at work in the two texts. In Martin, there is 
no overt narrator persona, and hence no superordinate narrator perspective. Since almost 
everything is filtered through reflector charac ters, the narration is  typically colored by 
the current reflector’s subjectivity. Furtherm ore, the ideological landscape in Martin 
emerges as a complex patchwork of evenly al igned character positions, all of which are 
only provisionally reliable. In short, focalization in Martin is dominantly and 
consistently internal. 
 Leiber’s text, on the other hand, has an authorial narrator, and thus a single 
dominant perspective to which all others are technically subordinate. Leiber’s narrator is 
not absolute in his power, of course, and habitually yields the floor to his characters and 
their private concerns: narratorial objectivity alternates with involved, story-internal 
subjectivity. The preceding text extracts already exemplify this. And while the authorial 
narrator is often quite free with  his evaluations, the characters are never reduced to his 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72
ideological mouthpieces, and only rarely are they explicitly judged as either good or 
bad. For an authorial agent, Leiber’s narr ator makes quite a few figurally oriented 
allowances. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
73
                                                
3. FIGURAL LANGUAGE AND VOICE 
3.1. The Three Techniques 
Dorrit Cohn distinguishes be tween three basic modes or techniques for representing 
figural consciousness in third person na rration: psycho-narration, quoted monologue, 
and narrated monologue (11 −14). I will call these techniques psychonarration, interior 
monologue, and free indirect discourse , respectively. 15 The first, psychonarration, 
comprises “the narrator’s discourse about  a character’s consciousness” (Cohn 14). In 
psychonarration, in other words, the narrator reports or analyzes what is going on inside 
the character’s mind. It is the most indirect and narratorial of the three techniques, and 
also the most privileged in its psychological access, since it need not be restrained by 
the character’s self-awareness (see Cohn 46, 56 −57). However, psychonarration can be 
used covertly as well as overtly. At the la tter end, we have aut horially oriented or 
“dissonant” psychonarration, which exploits “the narrator’s superior knowledge of the 
character’s inner life and his superior ability to present it and assess it” (Cohn 29). This 
type of psychonarration is characterized by authorial statements in gnomic present 
tense, speculative or explanatory commentar y on the character’s consciousness, and/or 
prominent analytical or conceptual terms that  set the narrator’s language apart from the 
character’s (Cohn 28−29, 31). By comparison, “consonant psychonarration” eschews all 
the above signs of authorial agency and priv ilege (Cohn 31). It also  avoids reportorial 
indirection, replaces abstract  statements with subjectively charged metaphors, and may 
 
 
 
15 I substitute interior monologue  for quoted monologue  and free indirect discourse  for narrated 
monologue as these seem to be the most common terms for the two techniques. They may not be the 
most descriptive terms for the phenomena in question,  but they should be the most accessible because 
of their popular usage. Psychonarration, as the most critically neglected technique, has no fixed name, 
and I have therefore decided to use Cohn’s original coinage (see Cohn 11 −12; Palmer 30 −31). 
However, I have dropped the hyphen as I find it both ungainly and unnecessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74
                                                
blend the character’s thoughts and feelings with his or her sensory experience (Cohn 31, 
see 49). In figural narration, psychonarration can even approach free indirect discourse 
by adopting figural vocabulary (Cohn 32−33, 138; Fludernik, Fictions 304). 
 Interior monologue represents “a character’s mental discourse” (Cohn 14). That is, 
it presents the character’s thoughts as directly quoted inner sp eech. It is the most direct 
consciousness technique, but also the most restricted in its psychological access: since it 
purports to render the contents of a figural mind verbatim, it is necessarily limited to the 
verbal and most conscious stratum of that mind (Cohn 76 −77, 139−40). Furthermore, 
interior monologue is crucially dependent on narrative context for its effect (Cohn 66, 
76). In authorial narration, when combined  with authorial glosses or dissonant 
psychonarration, interior monologues tend to increase the disparity  between narrator 
and character, often through irony (Cohn 66 −68, 76). Explicit quotation signals and 
attributive tags also draw attention to a narrating agen cy (Cohn 61, 68, 76). In contrast, 
interior monologues are at their most unobtrusi ve in figural contexts where the narrator 
omits all signs of quotation, avoids mi xing the monologues with psychonarration, 
allows figural language to co lor the narration, and generally adheres closely to figural 
subjectivity (Cohn 71, 76). In Cohn’s terms, this is an opposition between “ironically 
quoted” interior monologue and “unsignaled” interior monologue (139). 
 Free indirect discourse, finally, represents “a character’s mental discourse in the 
guise of the narrator’s discourse” (Cohn 14).16 More specifically, free indirect discourse 
renders the character’s thoughts and feelings in his or her own idiom, but it does this 
 
 
 
16 Even though Cohn defines free indirect discourse in terms of a transformation from an original inner 
speech act, that is, from interior monologue, the technique need not be conceived as implying such an 
act. Fludernik, for example, rejects this transforma tional approach, arguing in stead that free indirect 
discourse is a fundamentall y non-mimetic technique ( Fictions 75, 408, 453). Even Cohn allows that 
free indirect discourse can be ambiguous as to whether it represents actual words running through a 
character’s mind, or more nonverbal activity (103, see 106−07; see also Fludernik, 
Fictions 78). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
through third person narration (Cohn 100). The words belong to the narrator, but the 
voice that sounds through them belongs to the character. Free indirect discourse 
therefore falls somewhere between interior  monologue and psychonarration in meaning 
and function (Cohn 105). By casting the charact er’s “subjective” la nguage into the 
narrator’s “objective” grammar, it ostensibly  merges the two voices  of character and 
narrator, combining “the immediacy of quot ation and the mediacy of narration” (Cohn 
105−06). Like psychonarration and interior monol ogue, free indirect discourse runs the 
gamut between authorial and figural usage. Authorial narrators often use the technique 
together with authorial commentary to in troduce an ironic gap between themselves and 
the characters whose minds they represent (Cohn 118 −20). Rather than an authentic or 
serious representation, the result is a ki nd of “mock-impersonation” of figural 
subjectivity (Cohn 119, see 120). While Cohn restricts authoria l free indirect discourse 
to ironic passages, I would add that free indirect discour se can take on an authorial 
tonality in other contexts as well: collective focalization, for example, can be rendered 
in free indirect discourse to produce reflect orization. Figurally oriented free indirect 
discourse, on the other hand, is serious and empathic (Cohn 122, 139). That is, it 
embraces the character’s voice so completely th at the narrator’s voice is for all intents 
and purposes effaced. Such empathic free indi rect discourse is frequently combined 
with consonant psychonarration (Cohn 33, 134, 137; see Fludernik, Fictions 321). 
 As this short introduction suggests, th ere is no simple correlation between 
narrative situations and consciousness techniques (see Cohn 138; Fludernik, Fictions 
309). All three techniques occur in both aut horial and figural contexts. Psychonarration, 
for example, remains an important and comm on technique in figural narratives, despite 
popular belief (see Cohn 12, 38, 46; Fludernik, Fictions 77; Palmer 30 −31). Moreover, 
these techniques obviously do not  occur by themselves in actual texts, but “mix and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76
match in various ways” (Cohn 138; see Fludernik, Fictions 309, 319). Still, there are 
typical patterns of usage. It is generally acknowledged that there is a marked affinity 
between authorial narration and psychonarr ation on the one hand, and between figural 
narration and free indirect  discourse on the other (Cohn 111, 138; Fludernik, Fictions 
87; Stanzel 188, 197 −98). Interior monologue is more ne utral with regard to narrative 
situation: it betrays no pronounced  affinity for either type of  narration, but is certainly 
employed in both (see Cohn 66, 71, 138−39). 
 In the following analysis, my  aim is to more closely ch art the evocation of figural 
subjectivity in Leiber and Martin, to examine in what ways and to what extent the two 
narratives capture and incorporate characters’ voices. In addition to the three techniques, 
I also briefly discuss narrative discourse style. 
3.2. Psychonarration 
Psychonarration is clearly the preferred tec hnique for rendering characters’ minds in 
The Swords of Lankhmar . It typically takes the form of one or two short sentences that 
provide an internal motivation or context fo r external action, but there are also longer 
passages that focalize a character’s thoughts an d emotions in greater detail. Moreover, 
as might be expected in Leiber, its usage oscillates between the authorial and the figural, 
that is, between dissonance and consonance with the represented mind. 
 In the dissonant passages, the disparity between character and narrator is usually 
marked by authorial commentary that relies  on the narrator’s superior knowledge or 
assessment, or both. Consider, for exampl e, the following passage which finds the 
Mouser (magically reduced to rat size for nine hours ) in the rat kingdom below 
Lankhmar, reflecting on his next course of action: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77
Now, the Mouser had no intention of staying anything like nine hours in the rat-world. On 
the other hand, he didn’t exactly want to escape at once. Dodging around in Lankhmar like 
a nimbly animate gray doll for half a night didn’t appeal to him . . . . Besides, his mind was 
already afire with schemes to assassinate the rats’ king, if they had one, or foil their obvious 
project of conquest in some ev en more spectacular fashion on th eir home ground. He felt a 
peculiarly great self-confidence and had not realized yet that it was because he was fully as 
tall as the taller rats around, as tall as Fafhrd, relatively, and no longer the smallish man he 
had been all his life. (Leiber, 
Swords 151) 
This is an extended passage of psychonarration where each sentence conveys something 
about the Mouser’s consciousness. Although the syntax is unmistakably reportorial, the 
passage begins in a relativel y nondescript manner: there is nothing especially authorial 
about the psychonarration in the first thr ee sentences (“had no intention”, “didn’t 
exactly want”, “didn’t appeal to him”). In fact, the emphatic “anything like nine hours” 
and “didn’t exactly want” could well echo the Mouser’s subjectivity. Furthermore, while 
the hyperbolic “his mind was already afire” in the fourth sentence seems to border on 
authorial description, the clau se “if they had one” anchors the narrative perspective to 
the Mouser’s subjective knowledge. The last sentence, however, clearly spills over into 
dissonant psychonarration by explicitly reporting something the Mouser is unaware of, 
namely the reason for his newly found self-confidence (“ had not realized yet that it was 
because he was fully as tall as the taller ra ts around”). Reporting something a character 
does not know or think is, of course, an inherently authorial maneuver that cannot but 
draw attention to a disparity between character and narrator (see page 46 above). 
 Leiber’s narrator also employs extende d passages of psychonarration that remain 
relatively consonant with the focalized consciousness. The Mouser’s private misgivings 
about making a possibly inappropriate proposal  to Fafhrd concerning Hisvet, whom the 
Mouser is aching to bed, are a case in point: 
 The Mouser studied Fafhrd, wondering if it were politic to make a certain proposal he 
had in mind. He was not quite certain of the full nature of Fafhrd’s feelings toward Hisvet. 
He knew the Northerner was a goatish man enough and had yesterday seemed quite 
obsessed with the love-making they’d missed in Lankhmar, yet he also knew that his 
comrade had a variable romantic streak that was sometimes thin as a thread yet sometimes 
grew into a silken ribbon leagues wide in which armies might stumble and be lost. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
78
 On the afterdeck Slinoor was now conferring most earnestly with the cook, presumably 
(the Mouser decided) about Hisvet’s (and his own and Fafhrd’s) dinner. The thought of 
Slinoor having to go to so much trouble about the pleasures of three persons who today had 
thoroughly thwarted him made the Mouser grin and somehow also nerved him to take the 
uncertain step he’d been contemplating. 
 ‘Fafhrd,’ he whispered, ‘I’ll dice you for Hisvet’s favors.’ (Leiber, Swords 48) 
Two things stand out in this passage. On the one hand, only the Mouser’s consciousness 
is focalized from within. How Fafhrd will react to the Mouser’s proposal, and what 
Slinoor is discussing with the cook remain speculative, since the narrative perspective is 
restricted to the Mouser’s cognitive and se nsory horizon (i.e., he cannot read Fafhrd’s 
mind any more than he can hear Slinoor’s  words). Furthermore, the psychonarration 
does not show any obvious signs of dissona nce: no authorial glosses betray the 
narrator’s cognitive privilege, nor does the narrative employ markedly analytical or 
conceptual vocabulary. Instead, the Mouser’s thoughts are rendered in a straightforward 
manner (“wondering if it were politic to make  a certain proposal”, “He was not quite 
certain”, “He knew the Northerner was a goa tish man”, “he also knew that his comrade 
had a variable romantic  streak”, “the Mouser decided”, “The thought . . . nerved him to 
take the uncertain step he’d been contemplating”). 
 On the other hand, there is nothing pr ominently subjective about the passage 
either. It may be restricted to the Mouser’s  perspective, but it doe s not evoke his voice 
in any tangible sense. One reason for this is that the language does not incorporate the 
Mouser’s idiolect. In fact, apart from th e phrase “a goatish man enough” which can be 
read as the Mouser’s evaluation of Fafhrd, and the temporal deictic “now” which locates 
the focalization in story time, the language does not embrace the Mouser’s subjectivity 
at all (ibid.). As a result, the reportorial quality of the psych onarration (e.g., “he knew 
that”) is more apparent than it would otherw ise be. There is also a hint of authorial 
maneuvering in the way the narrative delays  revealing what the Mouser has in mind, 
referring to the proposal simply as “a certain proposal” and “the uncertain step” (ibid.). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79
The paralipsis pays off in the Mouser’s whisper which ends the passage on a surprising 
and comic note, but it also draws attention to  the fact that there is a narrating agency 
behind the Mouser’s internal perspective. In sum, while the above passage is technically 
internally focalized, and the psychonarration consonant, the figural effect is neutralized. 
 By and large, markedly dissonant or consonant passages of psychonarration are 
rare in Leiber. The most typical instantiations are short inserts that fall somewhere 
between authorial and figural in their orient ation. What is more, they often appear as 
adjuncts to external action, such as Fafhrd’s  trepidation about an invisible army as he 
makes his way through the mysteriously empty streets of Lankhmar: 
Whore Street, which was even more twisty than  Cheap Street, looked tenantless too, but he 
was hardly half a block beyond it when he heard the tramp of boots and the clink of armor 
behind him. Ducking into the narrow shadows, he watched a double squad of guardsmen 
cross hurriedly through the moonlight, going sout h on Whore Street in the direction of the 
South Barracks. They were crowded close toge ther, watched every way, and carried their 
weapons at the ready, despite the apparent absence of foe. This seemed to confirm Fafhrd’s 
notion of an army of invisibles. Feeling more spooked than ever, he continued rapidly on 
his way. (Leiber, Swords 194) 
The focus here is on Fafhrd’s journey through the streets and the wary group of soldiers 
passing him in a hurry. Psychonarration caps the action by briefly recording its internal 
effects on Fafhrd’s consciousness (“seemed to confirm Fafhrd’s notion”, “Feeling more 
spooked than ever”). While this adds to Fafhrd’s character by rendering his growing fear 
of the supernatural, the psychonarration is not  constitutive of the passage as such. More 
to the point, it is entirely neutral in tone: it is neither markedly dissonant nor markedly 
consonant in itself. If the passage as a whol e is read as externally focalized, then the 
psychonarration will most likely take on a dissonant cast. If, instead, the passage is 
interpreted as internally focalized, the ps ychonarration will appe ar consonant. (Apart 
from “looked tenantless” and “the tramp of boots and the clink of armor” in the first 
sentence, which suggest subjective percepti on, the passage does not readily cue either 
type of focalization. However, since the surrounding narrative closely observes Fafhrd’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80
perspective, and eschews authorial intrusions, the reader will most likely interpret the 
above passage as internally focalized.) 
 In general, narrative context is crucial to the psychonarration in Leiber. Because 
the technique typically punctuates the narrative in the form of short inserts, and since it 
is usually neutral rather than overtly dissonant or consonant, context becomes a decisive 
factor in orienting the reader. Given that external focalization is the rule in Leiber, 
psychonarration typically acquires an authorial feel simply by virtue of the surrounding 
narrative. 
 It is somewhat surprising that psyc honarration is the preferred consciousness 
technique in A Game of Thrones  as well. Figural narratives  should, after all, favor free 
indirect discourse for representing charac ters’ minds. The psychonarration in Martin, 
however, is almost exclusively consonant, of ten pronouncedly so. It is also much more 
common than in Leiber, and frequently ex tends to longer passages that are not 
subordinate to external action. The reflector characters habitually lose themselves in 
their private thoughts and memories, with th e internal scene completely eclipsing the 
external one. For example, psychonarration is the drivi ng force behind the following 
passage which focuses at length on Jon’s in itial loneliness as a Sworn Brother of the 
Night’s Watch: 
 If he must be alone, he would make solitude his armor. Castle Black had no godswood, 
only a small sept and a drunken septon, but Jon could not find it in him to pray to any gods, 
old or new. If they were real, he thought, they were as cruel and implacable as winter. 
 He missed his true brothers: little Rickon, br ight eyes shining as he begged for a sweet; 
Robb, his rival and best friend and constant companion; Bran, stubborn and curious, always 
wanting to follow and join in whatever Jon and Robb were doing. He missed the girls too, 
even Sansa, who never called him anything but “my half brother” since she was old enough 
to understand what 
bastard meant. And Arya . . . he missed her even more than Robb, 
skinny little thing that she was, all scraped knees and tangled hair and torn clothes, so fierce 
and willful. Arya never seemed to fit, no more than he had . . . yet she could always make 
Jon smile. He would give anything to be with her now, to muss up her hair once more and 
watch her make a face, to hear her finish a sentence with him. (Martin 179) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81
The passage mixes reflection and memory to great effect, resulting in an intimate and 
personal depiction of Jon’s al most bitter longing for the company of his siblings. The 
passage starts off on a figural note with a free indirect discourse (FID) rendering of 
Jon’s stubborn conviction to armor himself in solitude. The second sentence ends in 
simple psychonarration on Jon’s relationship wi th the gods – a theme that is briefly 
elaborated on in the third sentence th rough FID tagged with parenthetical 
psychonarration (“he thought”). The heart of the passage is the second paragraph where 
psychonarration is marked by the subtle yet ef fective repetition of the “He missed . . .” 
construction. More important than the verbal  incipits themselves are the subjective 
memories they cue: vivid character snapsh ots, each appropriate to Jon’s personal 
relationship with the brother or sister in question. The Ar ya segment, in particular, 
evokes Jon’s emotive subjectivity in a tangi ble way (note especially the empathic 
“skinny little thing that she was, all scraped knees and tangled hair and torn clothes, so 
fierce and willful” that encapsulates Jon’s brotherly affection for his sister). By 
introducing reflective pauses, the two ellipses further reinforce the impression that the 
narration is patterned after Jon’s flow of consciousness . Finally, the ending fuses 
psychonarration and FID in an interesting fa shion: the clause “He would give anything 
to be with her now” is arguably a statemen t about Jon’s consciousness, and therefore 
psychonarration, yet it feels mimetic rather th an reportorial. Furthe r, the present tense 
and the temporal deictic (“He would give . . . now”) clearly echo Jon’s voice in the now 
of story time (were it not for the third person reference, the sentence could easily pass as 
interior monologue). All in all, the passage reads as an em pathic representation of Jon’s 
thoughts. His voice may not be pronounced th roughout, but nor is there any hint of a 
narrator’s voice that might come into conflict with his. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
82
 The mixing of psychonarration and FID is very common in Martin. In fact, 
psychonarration in the novel frequently adopts figural vocabulary or blends with FID to 
such an extent that it becomes difficult to separate the two techniques. Here is a typical 
example from the opening of one of Sansa’s chapters: 
Sansa already looked her best. She had brushed out her long auburn hair until it shone, and 
picked her nicest blue silks. She had been looking forward to today for more than a week. It 
was a great honor to ride with the queen, and besides, Prince Joffrey might be there. Her 
betrothed. Just thinking it made her feel a strange fluttering inside, even though they were 
not to marry for years and years. Sansa did not really 
know Joffrey yet, but she was already 
in love with him. He was all she ever dreamt her prince should be, tall and handsome and 
strong, with hair like gold. She treasured ever y chance to spend time with him, few as they 
were. The only thing that scared her about today was Arya. Arya had a way of ruining 
everything. You never knew what she would do. (Martin 140) 
Sansa’s internal focalization consists almost entirely of consonant psychonarration and 
empathic FID. (The first two sentences ar e the only ones that la ck both, although there 
is already a hint of figural subjectivity in  the evaluative “her nicest blue silks”.) The 
third sentence cues focalization from within by retrospective psychonarration (“She had 
been looking forward to today”), which qui ckly shifts into pure FID in the fourth 
sentence (note especially the emphatic “and besides” which betrays the real reason for 
Sansa’s excitement). The fifth, verbless sentence caps the FID by redefining Joffrey in 
terms of what he means to Sansa. The na rration switches back to psychonarration in the 
sixth sentence (“thinking it made her feel a strange fluttering inside”), yet the expressive 
elements “Just” and “for years and years” clearly approach FID. The next two sentences 
are similar in that they too are psychonarration, reporting on Sansa’s mind through verbs 
of consciousness, yet include subjectivity ma rkers that color the narration with Sansa’s 
idiolect: the nearly spoken “ know”, the familiarizing denomination in “ her prince”, and 
the quixotic “tall and handsome and strong, with hair like go ld” all echo Sansa’s girlish 
infatuation with Joffrey (as does the implicitly ironic co ntrast between her not knowing 
him yet nonetheless being “already in love with him”). The ninth sentence continues the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
83
psychonarration with the most expressive predicate verb in  the passage (“She treasured 
every chance”) and ends in what seems to be yet another empathic FID extension (“few 
as they were”). The passage is concluded by discreet psychonarration (“The only thing 
that scared her”) followed by two sentence s in pure FID that t ogether voice Sansa’s 
anxiety about Arya. As a whole, the passage vividly captures Sansa’s adolescent naivety 
about her gallant prince: the voice that sounds through the text is clearly Sansa’s. 
 This interplay between psychonarration and FID supports Cohn’s argument that in 
a figural context the two techniques tend to blend in various ways, with psychonarration 
typically adopting fi gural vocabulary (137 −39; see section 3.1. above). However, the 
interplay in the above passage  could arguably be even more complete. The narrative 
could, for example, have incorporated Sa nsa’s idiolect much more forcefully. 
Nevertheless, I maintain that in the reading process the two techniques, as they are used 
in the passage, readily fuse into a smooth and continuous evocation of Sansa’s voice. 
 Dissonant psychonarration is virtually nonexistent in Marti n. In fact, one can 
really only talk about potential dissonance, and even then it is rarely psychonarration 
per se that causes it. For instance, contrast  the psychonarration and the denomination in 
this chapter opening: “There  were times—not many, but a few—when Jon Snow was 
glad he was a bastard. As he filled his wine cup once more from a passing flagon, it 
struck him that this might be one of them” (Martin 49). The psychonarration itself 
shows no obvious signs of dissonance. It does not entail superior knowledge on the 
narrator’s part, nor in any way evaluate or explain Jon’s consciousness. If anything, the 
emphatic “not many, but a few” echoes J on’s thoughts. The only thing that suggests 
dissonance between character and narrator is the formal  “Jon Snow” which does not 
sound like something Jon would call himself. Ho wever, as this is the first and only 
occurrence of such naming in  the entire chapter, the dissonance remains a momentary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84
effect only. (The formal naming can here be explained as an introductory gesture 
prompted by the fact that this is the first chapter to feature Jon as a reflector character.) 
 There are also the occasional narratoria l “slippages” that may evoke momentary 
dissonance (or just disorientation). The fo llowing passage comes from the middle of a 
heavily figural section in a Catelyn chapter: “Catelyn tensed at the mention of the name. 
Ned felt the anger in her, and pulled away ” (Martin 65). Does the narrative suddenly 
switch to Ned’s consciousness via psychonarr ation, or is the second sentence merely 
Catelyn’s implied observation? Formally, the second sentence seems to focalize Ned’s 
mind from within. There is nothing provisi onal or subjective about the sentence that 
suggests it should be attributed to Catelyn. If  this is a shift in focalization, then the 
passage breaks with the novel’s figural logic and betrays an authorial agency. However, 
contextually the sentence is easily recuperable as Catelyn’s perception. Because the 
surrounding narrative is  internally focalized  through Catelyn’s perspective, there is no 
reason not to gloss over the “slippage” and re ad the sentence as Catelyn’s (accurate) 
interpretation of Ned’s behavior. It needs to be stressed that such slippages are scarce in 
the novel, much more scarce than formal denomination, for example. 
 In Martin, psychonarration clearly correlate s with a figural narrative situation: its 
use is dominantly and often strongly consonant, and it frequently mixes with empathic 
free indirect discourse. That psychonarration is the preferred consciousness technique 
does not change the fact that the narrative is a figural one. However, it does suggest that 
the novel is not as pronouncedly figural as fi gural narratives can be. Leiber’s use of 
psychonarration, in contrast, corresponds to neither authorial nor figural narration in any 
marked way. The range of uses certainly entails an authorial narrator, yet it is ultimately 
the narrative context rather than the psychonarra tion as such that sets the tone. Still, the 
fact that psychonarration in Leiber normally takes the form of shor t, neutrally colored 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85
passages that are subordinate to  external action sugge sts that Leiber’s narrator is not as 
interested in portraying his characters’ inner worlds as, for example, Martin’s narrator. 
3.3. Interior Monologue 
Interior monologues are virtually nonexistent in Leiber. I have found only four short 
passages in the entire novel that can be read  as interior monologue s, and only the last 
two are unequivocally inner speech (see Leiber, Swords 67, 140, 216, 217). The narrator 
does not even observe consistent orthograp hical markings for the monologues (e.g., 
italics alternate with quotation marks). The technique is clearly a negligible feature in 
Leiber, and therefore requires no further consideration. 
 While not quite nonexistent, interior monologues are not very common in Martin 
either. Still, they are used consistently throughout the novel, scarce as they may be. The 
monologues are always rendered in italics and usually tagged with psychonarration. The 
most typical interior monologues are short, so litary clauses or sentences: “Butterflies 
fluttered nervously in Sansa’s stomach. 
I shouldn’t be afraid,  she told herself. I have 
nothing to be afraid of, it will all come out  well, Joff loves me and the queen does too, 
she said so” (Martin 619). The inclusion and exclusion of attributive tags (e.g., “she told 
herself”) does not seem to follow any particular pattern. And give n that the interior 
monologues are already explicitly marked, one  wonders why include tags in the first 
place. After all, they contai n little or no new informati on as they typically merely 
reiterate what is already obvious (e.g., that Sa nsa is thinking to herself). The tags do 
occasionally include adverbial modifiers, more  evocative verbs, or other such devices 
that further define the monol ogic acts, but such instances are few and far between. The 
tags rarely do more than anchor the monologu es to the third pers on narration. That is, 
they typically serve a purely incantatory pu rpose rather than a functional or thematic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86
one (cf. Cohn 64 −65). However, since a tag inescapably draws attention to the fact that 
there is someone quoting the character’s though ts, the effect is to reduce the intimacy 
gained via the interior monologue. The above passage would work fine without the “she 
told herself” clause. Monologues that lack tags certainly do not need them: “His smile 
emboldened her, made her feel beautiful and strong. He does love me, he does.  Sansa 
lifted her head and walked toward him, not too slow and not too fast. She must not let 
them see how nervous she was” (Martin 625). Here the interior monologue is allowed to 
flow uninterrupted. A tag clause, no matte r its position, would only distract from the 
empathic immediacy the monologue evokes. 
 Interior monologues in Martin never real ly deviate from clear, communicative 
English. The monologues may be colloquial in style and diction, and they may not even 
form complete clauses or sentences by themse lves, but they are always easily readable. 
The reader has no more trouble with the m onologues than s/he has with the narrator’s 
third person discourse. This legibility of monologic language, together with the explicit 
quotation signals (i.e., italics) and frequent tag clauses, marks Martin’s use of the 
technique as rather conservative. Fo r comparison, the following extract from Ulysses 
shows what James Joyce does wi th interior monologue. Leo pold Bloom is sitting in a 
funeral carriage, looking out onto the street: 
He passed an arm through the armstrap and looked seriously from the open carriage 
window at the lowered blinds of the avenue. One dragged aside: an old woman peeping. 
Nose whiteflattened against the pane. Thanking her stars she was passed over. 
Extraordinary the interest they take in a corpse. Glad to see us go we give them such 
trouble coming. Job seems to suit them. Huggermugger in corners. Slop about in 
slipperslappers for fear he’d wake. Then getting it ready. Laying it out. (Joyce 84) 
Here there are neither orthographic signals nor tag clauses to separate the interior 
monologue from its third person context (cf.  Cohn 62). The narration simply flows into 
interior monologue as the narrator quietly yi elds his voice to the character. Moreover, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87
the monologic language clearly breaks with fo rmal grammar: words are ellipted and the 
syntax broken in order to give the sentences a more abrupt and immediate feel. There is 
also the highly idiomatic and opaque vocabulary: “ whiteflattened”, “Huggermugger”, 
“slipperslappers” (cf. Cohn 96−97). As a result, Joyce’s interior monologue is markedly 
consonant, allowing a more ready and immediate access into figural thoughts than the 
interior monologues in Martin. The only features that Martin and Joyce seem to have in 
common are the first person reference and pres ent tense, the two universals of interior 
monologue (Cohn 62− 63). Then again, Joyce is experimental to the extreme. Like 
Martin, most modern novelists prefer easy legibility ove r stylistic experimentation 
(Cohn 89). 
 In Martin, interior monologues are used mainly for effect. Unlike free indirect 
discourse and psychonarration, interior monologues in the novel never extend to longer, 
independent passages, and are seldom importa nt in themselves. The following excerpt 
shows Sansa remembering her father’s beh eading. I quote at lengt h to exemplify not 
only the typical use of interior monologues in Martin, but also their characteristic ratio 
in the text: 
 Sometimes her sleep was leaden and dreamle ss, and she woke from it more tired than 
when she had closed her eyes. Yet those were  the best times, for when she dreamed, she 
dreamed of Father. Waking or sleeping, she saw him, saw the gold cloaks fling him down, 
saw Ser Ilyn striding forward, unsheathing Ice from the scabbard on his back, saw the 
moment . . . the moment when . . . she had wanted to look away, she had wanted to, her legs 
had gone out from under her and she had fallen to her knees, yet somehow she could not 
turn her head, and all the people were screaming and shouting, and her prince had smiled at 
her, he’d smiled and she’d felt safe, but only for a heartbeat, until he said those words, and 
her father’s legs . . . that was what she remembered, his legs, the way they’d jerked when 
Ser Ilyn . . . when the sword . . . 
 Perhaps I will die too, she told herself, and the thought did not seem so terrible to her. If 
she flung herself from the window, she could put an end to her suffering, and in the years to 
come the singers would write songs of her grief. Her body would lie on the stones below, 
broken and innocent, shaming all those who had betrayed her. Sansa went so far as to cross 
the bedchamber and throw open the shutters . . . but then her courage left her, and she ran 
back to her bed, sobbing. (Martin 741−42) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88
The first paragraph is mostly one long breathless FID sentence that empathically recalls 
the beheading through Sansa’s perspective (note the subtle repetitions, the ellipses, and 
especially the emphatically ma rked verbs that almost e voke inner speech). The short 
interior monologue that begins  the second paragraph essentially serves as a climax for 
the FID that precedes it. It is a sudden, dram atic interruption that explicitly names the 
one thing that the FID refuses to: death. But rather than naming he r father’s death, it 
evasively shifts the focus to Sansa, to her death, cuing the reflection that takes up most 
of the second paragraph. The monologue obviously has a structural purpose in bridging 
together the two paragraphs, yet it could easily be repl aced by third pe rson narration, 
namely FID (e.g., “Perhaps she would die too. The thought did not seem so terrible. If 
she flung herself . . .”). But wh at is irreplaceable is the in timate and dramatic note the 
monologue provides by directly evoking Sansa’s own silent words. The fact that it is 
such a short note makes it all the more striking. 
 The passage also shows how interior  monologues are most effective when 
combined with empathic FID. The first paragraph sets up Sansa’s subjectivity in a 
pronounced manner, which the monologue then briefly accentuates. Since the narrative 
is already strongly immersed in Sansa’s consciousness, the monologue, despite being 
overtly marked, does not noticeably depart from the narrative flow. It may be a dramatic 
note, yet it smoothly continues the internal focalization. The remainder of the second 
paragraph does not capture Sansa’s voice quite  as strongly as the first paragraph, but 
there is no mistaking the characteristic roman tic naivety that colors the narration: “she 
could put an end to her suffering . . . singers  would write songs of her grief . . . . broken 
and innocent, shaming all those who had betray ed her” (ibid.). The redundant tag (“she 
told herself”) and the sudden shift in naming in the last sentence (“Sansa” instead of a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89
simple “she”) arguably undermine the close internal focalization to  a certain extent 
(ibid.). The narrative perspective, however, remains Sansa’s. 
 This kind of mixing of empathic FID a nd interior monologue is not especially 
common in the novel. In fact, no one combin ation of interior monologue and narrative 
context stands out as more co mmon than another. This is likely due to th e sporadic use 
of interior monologues, and the fa ct that they are us ed primarily for effect (i.e., there is 
no need for consistency across monologues). 
 Interior monologues in Martin seem to  belong somewhere between authorial and 
figural in their orientation. On the one  hand, there are no unsignaled interior 
monologues. Indeed, the monologues are typically doubly signaled as they are always in 
italics, and nearly always tagged with incantatory clauses. On the other hand, the covert 
narrator does not indulge in authorial glosse s that might result in a disparity between 
himself and a character. The monologues may dr aw attention to a narrating agency by 
virtue of how they are marked, yet their narr ative context rarely does so, since internal 
focalization is the rule in the novel. The more strongly figural the narration, the less 
overt the monologic signals are. However,  whether the monologues gravitate toward 
dissonance or consonance is ultimately a moot  point. The fact that the most typical 
instantiations are short, so litary passages; that  the monologues are primarily employed 
for dramatic emphasis; and that their use is  relatively infrequent, mark the interior 
monologue as a minor consciousness technique in Martin. It is not a negligible narrative 
feature, since it is used c onsistently throughout the novel, but neither is it a defining 
one. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90
3.4. Free Indirect Discourse 
Free indirect discourse is not as common in Leiber as psychonarration, yet it is still 
solidly represented, making it a relevant narrative element. It is usually preceded or 
surrounded by psychonarration, and, interestingl y enough, it is almost always empathic 
(or at least it seems to be). The scene with Fafhrd and the furry calf, parts of which were 
analyzed in section 2.2.1. above, contains the longest and most empathic FID sequence 
in the novel. Running at two pages, the scene is also Leiber’s longest continuous 
passage of internal focalization. Here is a further quote from that scene: 
Fafhrd was snug abed but feeling somewhat constricted – clearly he had not taken off his 
boots or any other of his clothing or even unbelted his short-ax, the blade of which, 
fortunately covered by its thick leather sheath, stuck into his side. Yet he was also filled 
with a sense of glorious achievement – why, he wasn’t yet sure, but it was a grand feeling. 
 [. . . .] 
 While under his downy thick pillows— Ah, there was the explanation for his ever-
mounting sense of glory! Late last night he had cleaned them all out of every golden 
Lankhmarian rilk, every golden Kvarch Nar gront, every golden coin from the Eastern 
Lands, Quarmall, or elsewhere! Yes, he remembered it well now: he had taken them all – 
and at the simple game of sixes and seven, where the banker wins if he matches the number 
of coins the player holds in his fist; those Eight-City fools didn’t realize they tried to make 
their fists big when they held six golden coins and tightened them when they held seven. 
Yes, he had turned all their pockets and pouches inside out – and at the end he had crazily 
matched a quarter of his winnings against an oddly engraved slim tin whistle supposed to 
have magical properties . . . and won that too! And then saluted them all and reeled off 
happily, well-ballasted by gold like a treasure galleon, to bed and Hrenlet. Had he had 
Hrenlet? He wasn’t sure. (Leiber, 
Swords 74−75) 
The opening paragraph sets up the scene inside Fafhrd’s mind through a mix of narrated 
perception, psychonarration, and subtle free indirect disc ourse. Although the paragraph 
is dominated by psychonarration, the narrative  language already includes subjectivity 
markers that evoke Fafhrd’s voice (“clearly”, “even”, “fortunately”, “glorious”, “why”, 
“grand”). The second paragraph, in turn, re ads as one long FID passage that recalls 
Fafhrd’s success at the gaming table. Fafhrd’s voice is most pronounced in the three 
exclamatory sentences, and in the lone inte rrogative one near the end. (The long third 
sentence could well have included an exclam ation point.) Even the two short instances 
of psychonarration feel monologic rather than reportorial; the first one because it is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91
colored by Fafhrd’s language (“Yes, he remembered it well now”), and the second one 
because it employs a simple copula instead  of an actual verb of cognition (“He wasn’t 
sure”). The paragraph also incorporates further FID markers that anchor the narration to 
Fafhrd’s subjectivity: the spatial deictic “there”, the evaluative “fools” and “crazily”, a 
second emphatic “Yes”, and the provisiona l “supposed to have magical properties”. 
There is even the sudden “them all” which pos its a familiarity that  the reader does not 
share with Fafhrd (i.e., this is the first reference to the other players, and hence new 
information to the reader). A ll in all, Fafhrd’s subjectivity sounds through strongly and 
vocally. 
 There are only a few authorial FID passage s in Leiber, and most of them seem to 
target Glipkerio Kistomerces, Lankhmar’s co mically pathetic overlord. For instance, 
consider the narrative voice in this passage  which begins with Glipkerio’s reflections, 
and then moves to another location to focalize on Reetha and Samanda: 
He had seen with his own eyes Hisvin slay rats with his spell – while on his own part he 
had arranged for all soldiers and police to be in the South Barracks at midnight listening to 
that tiresome Olegnya Mingolsbane. He had done his part, he told himself; Hisvin would do 
his; and at midnight his troubles and vexations would be done. 
 But it was such a long time until midnight ! Once more boredom engulfed the black-
togaed, purple-pansy-coroneted, beanpole monarch, and he began to think wistfully of 
whips and Reetha. Beyond all other men, he mused, an overlord, burdened by 
administration and ceremonies, had no time for even the most homely hobbies and innocent 
diversions. 
 Reetha’s questioners, meanwhile, gave up for the day and left her in Samanda’s charge, 
who from time to time described gloatingly to the girl the various all-out thrashings and 
other torments the palace mi stress would visit on her as soon as her namby-pamby 
inquisitors were through with her. (Leiber, Swords 162) 
The first paragraph readily reads as intern al focalization. Glipke rio’s subjectivity may 
not be especially pronounced in it, yet the subtle “ that tiresome Olegnya Mingolsbane” 
clearly voices not only  Glipkerio’s private evaluation of Olegnya (“tiresome”) but also 
his familiarity with him (“that”). Furthermor e, the second sentence is FID instantiated 
by parenthetical psychonarration (see Fludernik, Fictions 285; Jahn N8.6.). The second 
paragraph continues the FID in a much mo re pronounced manner in Glipkerio’s almost 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92
childish exclamation of frus tration. However, the openi ng clause of the following 
sentence puts an abrupt stop to the internal  focalization. First, the vivid image of the 
thin and tall Glipkerio weari ng his black toga and floral wr eath implies external visual 
focalization (“the black-togaed, purple-pans y-coroneted, beanpole monarch”). Second, 
the image is a patently negativ e judgment of him: “purple-pansy” suggests that he is an 
effeminate weakling while “beanpole” just makes him comic. This is hardly Glipkerio’s 
self-evaluation as he tends to hold a very conceited view of himself (e.g., “the most 
homely hobbies and innocent diversions” incl ude watching Samanda whip the palace 
slaves). Lastly, the formal name (“monarch”) and its densely descriptive premodifier 
necessarily draw attention to the narrator who saw fit to use them. The opening clause is 
thus an overtly authorial maneuver that potenti ally casts the entire passage as externally 
focalized. The authorial feel is augmented by the sudden shift in focalization in the third 
paragraph, and the durative-summative narra tion which opens the new scene from an 
external perspective (“who from time to time described gloatingly to the girl the various 
all-out thrashings and other torments”). 
 In Leiber, empathic collective focalizati on also produces the occasional passage of 
authorial FID. Fafhrd, the Mouser, and Slinoor are here staring at another ship: “Slinoor 
nodded and pointed toward the cutter. It was possible dimly to see tiny dark forms – rats 
surely! – climbing over its side fr om out of the water” (Leiber, Swords 29). The second 
sentence represents impaired spatial per ception: the implied observer can only “dimly” 
see “dark forms” swarming the ship. This appears to be internal focalization. That direct 
reference to the observer is omitted further enfo rces the story-internal quality (i.e., it is 
implicit that the sentence originates in the observer’s consciousness). However, no 
internal focalizer is established for this s cene. Since heterodiegetic narrators can only 
focalize from an external position, it must be assumed that the sentence constitutes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
93
collective focalization through Fafhrd, the Mouser, Slinoor , and anyone else present at 
the scene. The provisional, story-internal qua lity of the perception, accentuated by the 
FID exclamation (“rats surely!”), mark the sentence as empathic collective focalization, 
that is, as reflectorization. In short, the FID clause voices the collective opinion of a 
group of characters. Such collective focus is an inescapably authorial maneuver in that it 
highlights the narrator’s powers of omniscience. 
 Much like interior monologue in Martin, free indirect discourse in Leiber is used 
primarily for dramatic effect. That is, while the FID passa ges voice characters’ thoughts 
and emotions in an empathic manner, the focus is typically on dramatic rather than 
serious representation of consciousness. This is  most apparent in the fact that the FID 
passages in Leiber usually take the form of  an exclamation or a question, both of which 
readily translate into dramatic cues fo r punctuating the narration. All three preceding 
FID examples are highly typical in that they  centrally incorporate exclamations. Indeed, 
this mixing of empathic representation and dramatic function often results in almost too 
empathic passages: it is as though the char acters do nothing but in ternally scream at 
themselves. Rather than enhance the internal perspective, such FID actually distracts the 
reader from it. The dramatic function is also  evident in how FID in Leiber relates to the 
narrative as a whole: it is not used very often, and, like psychonarration, it typically tags 
external action, and rarely extends to passages longer than a sentence or two. (There are 
only a handful of FID passages in the novel th at run for more than two sentences. The 
Fafhrd and the calf scene is one such example.) Like psychonarration, then, it is used 
primarily for something other than the seri ous and sustained repr esentation of figural 
consciousness. 
 Free indirect discourse in Martin, by comparison, is markedly serious. It often 
results in dramatic moments, yet it is prim arily a serious conscious ness technique. Its 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94
use is also consisten tly empathic. It is a highly co mmon technique in Martin, and, like 
psychonarration, runs the gamut between short and long instantiations. Moreover, as has 
already been noted, it frequently combines w ith consonant psychonarration. In fact, the 
longer the FID continues, the more likely it is to incorporate psychonarration. 
 Martin’s narrator often employs FID in  a low-key fashion to augment figural 
subjectivity. The following passage, for exampl e, is mostly a combination of flashback 
exposition and psychonarration th at sets the scene and opens  up the back story through 
Will’s recollection. However, note the subtle FID that dots the narration. (The other two 
characters in the scene are the southron Gared and Commander Royce.) 
 Will shared his [Gared’s] unease. He had been  four years on the Wall. The first time he 
had been sent beyond, all the old stories had come rushing back, and his bowels had turned 
to water. He had laughed about it afterward. He was a veteran of a hundred rangings by 
now, and the endless dark wilderness that the southron called the haunted forest had no 
more terrors for him. 
 Until tonight. Something was different tonight. There was an edge to this darkness that 
made his hackles rise. Nine days they had been riding, north and northwest and then north 
again, farther and farther from the Wall, hard on the track of a band of wildling raiders. 
Each day had been worse than the day that had come before it. Today was the worst of all. 
A cold wind was blowing out of the north, and it made the trees rustle like living things. All 
day, Will had felt as though something were watching him, something cold and implacable 
that loved him not. Gared had felt it too. Will wanted nothing so much as to ride 
hellbent 
for the safety of the Wall, but that was not a feeling to share with your commander. 
 Especially not a commander like this one. (Martin 2) 
The perspective is undoubtedly Will’s, yet the passage does not capture his subjectivity 
in any vivid sense. In fact, the expository  nature of the passage suggests a narrating 
agency, and thus works against the internal focalization. Still, the passage does not read 
as authorial either, which, to my mind, results from the discreet FID that runs through it. 
First, there are the subtle subjectivity  markers: the temporal deictic “by now”, and the 
proximal deictic “this darkness”, which locate the narrat ive perspective in the here and 
now of the story; the evocative “ hellbent”, which echoes Will’s fear; and the personal 
“your commander”. Second, the first two sentences and the sixth sentence of the second 
paragraph, as well as the single-sentence thir d paragraph are pure empathic FID (“Until 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
95
tonight”, “Something was different tonight”, “Today was the worst of all”, “Especially 
not a commander like this one”). Ther e are no verbs of cognition to signal 
psychonarration, yet the four sentences clearly verbalize thoughts and emotions running 
through Will’s mind: his fear of something in the forest, and his disposition toward his 
commander (which is further exposed in the subsequent paragraphs). The sentences also 
incorporate additional deictics that are crucia l to the FID effect (“tonight”, “Today”, “a 
commander like this one”). What is more, the senten ces are neither exclamatory nor 
interrogative, which partly explains their low-key quality. Lastly, the exposition itself is 
strategically incomplete: “the Wall” and “all the old stories” are oblique references that 
are introduced as given information (“the”, “all the”) yet left unexplained, forcing the 
reader to imaginatively identify with Will’s subjective realm of experience and 
familiarity. While Will’s voice may not be pronounced, there is enough FID to at least 
tint the passage with it. 
 In addition to such short and subtle in stances of FID, Martin’s narrative also 
abounds in longer and more overt ones. Take , for example, this passage which shows 
Arya bitterly reflecting on how her sister Sansa is much better suited to being a noble 
lady: 
It wasn’t fair. Sansa had everything. Sansa was two years older; maybe by the time Arya 
had been born, there had been nothing left. Often it felt that way. Sansa could sew and 
dance and sing. She wrote poetry. She knew how to dress. She played the high harp and the 
bells. Worse, she was beautiful. Sansa had gotten their mother’s fine high cheekbones and 
the thick auburn hair of the Tullys. Arya took after their lord father. Her hair was a 
lusterless brown, and her face was long and so lemn. Jeyne used to call her Arya Horseface, 
and neigh whenever she came near. It hurt that the one thing Arya could do better than her 
sister was ride a horse. Well, that and manage a household. Sansa had never had much of a 
head for figures. If she did marry Prince Joff, Arya hoped for his sake that he had a good 
steward. (Martin 70−71) 
The opening “It wasn’t fair” empathically evokes Arya’s petulant disposition, and cues 
the FID that runs through the entire passage. Significantly, the FID is apparent in both 
diction and syntax. The former includes a num ber of subjectivity markers: the shocked 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96
“the high harp and the bells”, which betrays Arya’s envy of Sansa’s skill in not one but 
two musical instruments; the despondent “ Worse, she was beautiful”; the subjective 
denomination in “their lord father”, which echoes Arya’s reverence for (and slight 
distance to) her noble father; the emphatic “Well”, which punc tuates the narration as 
though it were a mimetic rendering of Arya’s flow of thoughts; and the inadvertently 
sarcastic “a good steward”, which captures Arya’s childlike honesty about her sister’s 
poor accounting skills in a comically roundabout way. 
 The syntax, for its part, reflects Arya ’s consciousness in that the passage is 
composed almost entirely of short, simple se ntences. This creates the illusion that they 
are formulated in the mind of a child, or oriented toward such a mind. The childlike 
quality is accentuated by the substantial, though not  pronounced, reliance on the 
coordinating conjunction “and”. The repetitive syntax in th e first half also gives the 
passage a kind of breathle ssness that correlates with  the verbal output one 
conventionally expects from a child (“Sansa had . . . . Sansa was . . . . Sansa could . . . . 
She wrote . . . . She knew . . . . She played . . . . she was” (Martin 70)). 
 The syntax and the diction thus combin e to produce a vivid evocation of figural 
subjectivity through FID. In fact, the FID effect is so strong that it will most likely 
subsume the brief psychonarration in  the reading process (“Often it felt that way”, 
“Arya hoped for his sake that he had a good steward” (Martin 70 −71)). That is, even 
though the two instances are technically buil t around verbs of cognitio n, the reader will 
most likely interpret them as part of th e FID that surrounds th em, rather than as 
psychonarration per se (cf. Fludernik’s “interpretative obstination” (Fictions 285, 451)). 
 Like psychonarration, FID in Martin is never really  authorial. Aside from 
exposition, which may occasionally give th e surrounding narrative an authorial touch, 
the FID consistently takes on an authorial tonality only when it is flanked by formal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
97
denomination. In general, formal denomination is the one clearly dissonant feature that 
runs through the entire narrativ e. (Even the exposition is al ways recuperable in figural 
terms.) Familiar or subjective names are s till the most common c hoice, of course. The 
third person narration typically names or identifies characters the way the reflector 
character would name or identify them: accord ing to his or her subjective familiarity 
and current disposition (e.g., a Tyrion chapter will prefer “Tyrion” over “Tyrion 
Lannister” when referring to Tyrion as the reflector). Nonetheless, instances of formal 
denomination pop up throughout th e novel (see also section 
3.2. above). For example, 
consider the figural effect in the following passage, which is taken from the end of one 
of Eddard’s chapters. King Robert has just of fered to marry his son to Eddard’s eldest 
daughter, and make Eddard the King’s Hand, which would take him away from his 
home in the north: 
 “Yes, yes, of course, tell Catelyn, sleep on it if you must.” Th e king reached down, 
clasped Ned by the hand, and pulled him roughly to his feet. “Just don’t keep me waiting 
too long. I am not the most patient of men.” 
 For a moment Eddard Stark was filled with a terrible sense of foreboding. This was his 
place, here in the north. He looked at the stone figures all around them, breathed deep in the 
chill silence of the crypt. He could feel the eyes of the dead. They were all listening, he 
knew. And winter was coming. (Martin 48) 
From the familiar “Ned” in the first paragraph, which represents the standard reference 
to Eddard, the narrative suddenly shifts to th e formal “Eddard Stark” in the concluding 
paragraph. Such an abrupt shift to the reflector character’s full name cannot but 
introduce a gap between characte r and narrator. In short, the opening sentence of the 
second paragraph reads as potentially dissonant psychonarration. However, Eddard’s 
voice is recuperated almost instantly: the se cond sentence is markedly empathic FID. 
(Note especially the doubly empathic “ This”, which both locates the focalization in 
story space and emphatically approaches inner speech.) The formal naming is hardly 
enough to thwart the internal focalization that  dominates the chapter, but its effect is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98
nevertheless jarring to the figural feel of the passage : the naming undermines the 
immersion into Eddard’s perspective by creating a momentary hiatus between character 
and narrator. Still, the formal “Eddard Stark” serves a clear purpose: it lends the ending 
a solemnity that helps highlight the grav e and momentous decision the character now 
faces. 
 This type of dramatic emphasis appear s to be the most common use of formal 
denomination in Martin. Indeed, formal name s are usually found either at the beginning 
or at the very end of a chapter, where dram atic notes tend to be the most effective. 
Formal denomination is also used for the odd introductory emphasis, as well as for 
simple stylistic variation. Again, Martin does not hesitate to put the needs of dramatic 
storytelling before those of formal consistency. 
 In sum, even though FID is dominantly empathic in both Leiber and Martin, it is 
only in Martin that the technique is used fo r the serious representation of characters’ 
thoughts and emotions. In Leiber, the empathy tends to serve a dramatic rather than a 
strictly representational purpose, which ma kes the technique more about storytelling 
and less about figural consciousness. This emph asis on storytelling is also apparent in 
that FID is relatively scarce in Leiber, and th at it is often ancillary to external action 
(i.e., story events). Martin represents the opposite: FID is not only substantial in the 
novel, but also exclusively seri ous, often extendi ng to longer passages  that eclipse the 
external scene entirely. It is an inseparable and constitutive aspect of the narration. Still, 
the FID effect is not always marked. As the above analysis shows, FID in Martin ranges 
from short and subtle to long and pronounced. It follows that the evocation of figural 
voice ranges accordingly: there are passages that incorporate only a touch of the 
reflector character’s voice, and passages  where the reflector’s voice sounds through 
strongly. Together with the fact that FID is secondary to psychonarration in the novel, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99
this suggests that Martin’s narrator does not imbue the narra tive with figural voice as 
extensively and as thoroughly as the narrator of a figural narrative might. 
3.5. Narrative Discourse 
One additional feature that warrants a brief comment, since it has a bearing on the issue 
of voice, is narrative discourse style, that is , the language style used in the third person 
narration. In both Leiber  and Martin, the heterodiegetic narrator employs a prose style 
that remains relatively consistent throughout the narrative. As the preceding excerpts 
already show, the two novels clearly differ in their prose. Here are two further examples 
chosen at random: 
 When he had gone, Eddard Stark went to the window and sat brooding. Robert had left 
him no choice that he could see. He ought to thank him. It would be good to return to 
Winterfell. He ought never have left. His sons  were waiting there. Perhaps he and Catelyn 
would make a new son together when he returned, they were not so old yet. And of late he 
had often found himself dreaming of snow, of the deep quiet of the 
wolfswood at night. 
 And yet, the thought of leaving angered him as well. So much was still undone. Robert 
and his council of cravens and flatterers would beggar the realm if left unchecked . . . or, 
worse, sell it to the Lannisters in payment of their loans. And the truth of Jon Arryn’s death 
still eluded him. Oh, he had found a few pieces , enough to convince  him that Jon had 
indeed been murdered, but that was no more than the spoor of an animal on the forest floor. 
He had not sighted the beast itself yet, though  he sensed it was there, lurking, hidden, 
treacherous. (Martin 356) 
 
Thereafter Fafhrd had mastered one of the tethered Mingol horses despite its fiendish biting 
and kicking. The surviving girl had revealed among her other shriekings that her family 
might still be alive among the defenders of Klel g Nar, so Fafhrd had swung her up on his 
saddlebow despite her frantic struggles and efforts to bite. When she quieted somewhat, he 
had been stirred by her slim sprawly limbs so close and her lemur-large eyes and her 
repeated assertion, reinforced by horrendous maidenly curses and quaint childhood slang, 
that all men without exception were hairy beasts, this with a sneer at Fafhrd’s luxuriously 
furred chest. But although tempted to amorousness he had restrained himself out of 
consideration for her coltish youth – she seemed scarce twelve, though tall for her age – and 
recent bereavement. Yet when he had returned her to her not very grateful and strangely 
suspicious family, she had replied to his courteous promise to return in a year or two with a 
wrinkling of her snub nose and a sardonic flirt of her blue eyes and slim shoulders, leaving 
Fafhrd somewhat doubtful of his wisdom in sparing her his wooing and also saving her in 
the first place. (Leiber, 
Swords 91−92) 
Martin’s prose has a simple and natural feel to it. The language remains more literate 
than colloquial, yet its syntax is neither es pecially formal nor elaborate. The sentences 
are typically short rather than long, simp le rather than complex. Martin’s narrator 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100
usually steers clear of multiple subordination, and, as a result,  the text is hardly ever 
convoluted. Adjectival and adverbial modifier s are used sparingly, and the diction in 
general is straightforward a nd down-to-earth, often idiomatic . There is inevitably some 
specialized and archaic vocabulary – terms re lating to medieval arms and armor, for 
example – but this is never fl aunted. In short, Martin’s pr ose is highly accessible, and 
rarely draws attention to the narrator as a mediating agency. (When it does draw 
attention, it is usually to the reflector character whose subjectivity it voices.) 
 Leiber, in contrast, is a more difficu lt read, especially for someone who is not 
familiar with his prose (or with the Sword a nd Sorcery aesthetic in general). In Leiber, 
the language tends to be fo rmal, florid, and highly desc riptive. Long and complex 
sentences seem to be as common as shorter and simpler ones, and the former sometimes 
run for so long and become so p acked that the results fall just short of torturous, at least 
compared to Martin’s more economic prose. (The third and last sentences in the above 
Leiber quote are particularly heavy on the intake, although even they do not represent 
the narrator at his most verbose.) However, the most conspicuous aspect of Leiber’s 
prose style is its descriptive density: the na rrator seems to tag nearly everything with 
descriptive modifiers (e.g., “its fiendish biting and kicking”, “her frantic struggles and 
efforts to bite”, “her slim sprawly limbs”, “her lemur-large eyes”, “horrendous maidenly 
curses”, “Fafhrd’s luxuriously furred  chest”, “her not very grateful and strangely 
suspicious family” (ibid.)). Leiber’s language is markedly stylized, and, as such, draws 
attention to itself, and thus to the narrator, in a way that Martin’s seemingly less stylized 
prose does not. This gives Leiber’s prose an inescapably authorial flavor. 
 Since external focalization is the norm in  Leiber, and since the stylized quality of 
the prose already suggests a speaker persona, the narrative language becomes 
synonymous with the narrator’s voice. This colors everything in the narrative as at least 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101
minimally authorial. The authorial flavor affects even the internal focalization, since the 
prose style is consistently maintained th roughout the novel (i.e., it is the same for both 
external and internal focal ization). The language therefore introduces an authorial 
subtext to even the most figurally oriented  passages. For example, it is not always 
possible to tell whether empath ic FID should be read as au thentic internal focalization, 
that is, as empathic FID, or as the narrator’s em pathic-imaginative projection, or 
reflectorization. The fact that FID in Leiber is typically dramatic rather than serious 
tallies with the latter option. The so-called dual voice hypothesis, which explains FID as 
the commingling of the voices of character an d narrator, and typically denotes FID with 
an authorial orientation, can be provisionally applied to Leiber as well, even though the 
FID passages in his novel are rarely  authorial per se (see Fludernik, Fictions 322−23, 
350; Rimmon-Kenan 112; Stanzel 191, 198; cf. Cohn 112). Since the narrative language 
continuously suggests a speaker, even the most empathic FID passages cannot but be 
tinted with his voice. 
 It should be noted, however, that Leiber’s narrator, while authorial, never emerges 
as a clear narrator persona. He never explicitly refers to hi mself or the act of narration, 
and generally steers clear of explicit judgments and intrusive commentary. The 
following passage is the closest he ever comes to establishing himself as an “I”: 
“Imagine the scream of a leopard, the sn arl of a tiger, and the roaring of a lion 
commingled, and one will have some faint suggestion of the sound the tin whistle 
produced” (Leiber, 
Swords 217). The imperative “Imagine ” evokes an addressee, and, 
by extension, an addresser, while the indefinite “one will have” seems to include an “I”. 
However, this “I” is entirely implicit. This is true for the novel as a whole. The narrative 
evokes an authorial narrator persona, yet it does this through rather than in the narration, 
so to speak. It is the various  manifestations of external focalization, from panoramic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102
spatial focalization and reflectorization to footnotes and pr ivileged exposition, 
accentuated by the stylized prose, that evoke  the authorial narrator. The narrator’s 
persona and voice are not as pronounced as those of an authorial narrator can be. 
3.6. Conclusion 
The above analysis both reinforces and redefi nes the narrative patterns that emerged in 
Leiber and Martin in the previous discus sion on space, time, and cognition. In Martin, 
on the one hand, the substantial use of cons onant psychonarration and empathic FID for 
the serious representation of figural consci ousness clearly signifi es figural narration. 
The near lack of authorially oriented ps ychonarration and FID only enforces this, as 
does the inconspicuous narrative discourse that  rarely draws attention to a narrating 
agency. On the other hand, the fact that ps ychonarration rather th an FID is the chief 
consciousness technique, and that  the FID effect is often su btle or subdued show that 
the narrative is not as figural as it could be. The form ally conspicuous use of interior 
monologues may also distract from the fi gural narration. Nevertheless, a figural 
narrative situation, often in pronounced form, clearly dominates in Martin. 
 Leiber’s case, again, is more comple x. Psychonarration overshadows FID to a far 
greater extent than in Martin, as can be expe cted from authorial narration, yet its tone is 
typically neutral rather than  dissonant. The FID passages, in turn, are nearly always 
empathic in form, which suggests figural narration. Their function, however, is dramatic 
rather than seriously figural, and they are relatively infrequent. This correlates with 
authorial narration. The authorial orientation in  Leiber is also evid ent in that both the 
psychonarration and FID tend to take the form  of short passages th at are thematically 
subordinate to external action. Finally, the narrator employs a highl y stylized narrative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103
discourse that colors everything as at least latently authorial, including the empathic 
FID. 
 Leiber’s novel thus remains an authorial na rrative that incorporates distinct figural 
tendencies. These tendencies, however, are not as pronounced or extensive in their 
evocation of figural subjectiv ity and voice as the amount of  internally focalized or 
reflectorized perception and cognition may suggest. Despite his obvious affection for 
his fallibly human characters, Leiber’s na rrator is ultimately much more focused on 
storytelling than the serious and realistic representation of figural consciousness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
104
4. THE INWARD TURN IN MODERN FANTASY 
This chapter presents a brief overview of th e use of authorial a nd figural narration in 
modern fantasy beyond Leiber a nd Martin. It broadly charts the inward turn of fantasy 
by drawing on a further selection of works of ma instream fantasy. In contrast to the two 
preceding chapters, the present one offers littl e in-depth analysis. Instead, each work is 
briefly introduced in terms of its relation to the two narrative situations, and to the 
consciousness techniques, followed by a longish  text extract that exemplifies these 
relations in a prototypical manner. Since the focus is on historical development, the 
works are presented in roughly chronological or der according to their original date of 
publication. 
 Together, the selected works span the last 70 years of modern fantasy writing. I 
have chosen what I consider to be repres entative works by major fantasists, including 
several classics that have f undamentally influenced the de velopment of the genre. In 
addition to American authors, I have also in cluded a few early British ones whose work 
has helped shape the American fantasy tradition. Tolkien, for example, has had a far 
greater influence in the US than in the UK, and therefore warra nts inclusion in any 
discussion on American fantasy (Jakubowski 223, 227, 231). (Indeed, his work is all but 
inescapable.) Finally, it needs to be emphasized  that the selection is not meant to be in 
any way comprehensive. My aim is simply to provide a rough sk etch of the dynamic 
between authorial and figural narration in modern American fantasy during the past 
seven decades. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
105
4.1. Before the 1970s: The Modern Classics 
It is safe to say that Anglo-American figural  fantasy narratives did not exist before the 
1970s. All the modern classics that I am fa miliar with are authorial narratives. Lord 
Dunsany, E. R. Eddison, Robert E. Howard, Ursula K. Le Guin, Fritz Leiber, David 
Lindsay, Mervyn Peake, J. R. R. Tolkien, and T. H. White, for example, all rely on the 
authorial narrator in fashioni ng story worlds and represen ting experience within them. 
This is not to say that their work is cut from the exact same cloth, as it most certainly is 
not. The narratives differ wide ly in both form and content. Moreover, they employ 
authorial narrative techniques in diverse wa ys, mixing in figural techniques with equal 
variety. Yet the general authorial framework is the same for all. To exemplify this, I 
have chosen four texts by four different authors: Howard, Peake, Tolkien, and Le Guin. 
 Robert E. Howard (1906− 36) is arguably the most in fluential early American 
fantasist. His importance to the genre is of ten regarded as equal to or second only to 
Tolkien’s (Jakubowski 225; Science 1194; see Fantasy 481−83; Science 562, 589− 90, 
1194−96). Conan, the archetypal Sword and Sorcery hero, is Howard’s most celebrated 
creation (Fantasy 482; Science 589). The Conan narratives are among the most action-
oriented in the genre, which partly explai ns why Howard’s narrator shows so little 
interest in his characters’ i nner lives. External focalizatio n from without is the most 
common form of focalization. The represen tation of figural c onsciousness almost 
always takes the form of dissonant or neutrally toned psychonarration, wrapped in short, 
solitary passages. FID is scarce, and typically dramatic rather than empathic or serious, 
whereas interior monologues are virtually nonexistent. Internal focalization, or passages 
that approach internal focalization, are rare. This focus on external over internal reality 
is strikingly apparent in that the characters,  particularly Conan, are often defined more 
by their outward appearance and physical actions than by their private thoughts and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
106
emotions (which the narrator probes rare ly enough as it is). Indeed, the overriding 
feeling in the Conan stories is  often one of raw and viscer al physicality. Yet despite his 
authorial sensibilities, the narrator never emerges as a distinct persona. 
 The following passage from the short st ory “Queen of the Black Coast” (1934) 
presents a typical example of Howard’s furious action-aesthetic. Conan, armored in mail 
and wielding a broadsword, fights off a ship-full of pirates with trademark gusto: 
 The fight on the Argus was short and bloody. The stocky sailors, no match for the tall 
barbarians, were cut down to a man. Elsewhere the battle had taken a peculiar turn. Conan, 
on the high-pitched poop, was on a level with the pirate’s deck. As the steel prow slashed 
into the Argus, he braced himself and kept his feet under the shock, casting away his bow. A 
tall corsair, bounding over the rail, was met in midair by the Cimme rian’s great sword, 
which sheared him cleanly through the torso, so that his body fell one way and his legs 
another. Then, with a burst of fury that left  a heap of mangled corp ses along the gunwales, 
Conan was over the rail and on the deck of the 
Tigress. 
 In an instant he was the center of a hurrica ne of stabbing spears and lashing clubs. But 
he moved in a blinding blur of steel. Spears bent on his armor or swished empty air, and his 
sword sang its death-song. The fighting-madness of his race was upon him, and with a red 
mist of unreasoning fury wavering before his blazing eyes, he cleft skulls, smashed breasts, 
severed limbs, ripped out entrails, and littered the deck like a shambles with a ghastly 
harvest of brains and blood. 
 Invulnerable in his armor, his back against the mast, he heaped mangled corpses at his 
feet until his enemies gave back panting in rage and fear. Then as they lifted their spears to 
cast them, and he tensed himself to leap and die in the midst of them, a shrill cry froze the 
lifted arms. They stood like statues, the black giants poised for the spear-casts, the mailed 
swordsman with his dripping blade. (Howard 126−27) 
The scene is all action. The pers pective is that of an omniscient observer focused on the 
wholesale presentation of physical mayhem. There are a few subtle touches of external 
focalization from within, yet these are mere ly footnotes to the action. Figural narrative 
techniques have little currency in Howardian poetics. 
 Mervyn Peake’s (1911 −68) Titus Groan (1946), the first volume in his seminal 
Gormenghast series (1946 −59), employs an authorial narrat or that is both more overt 
than the one in Howard, and more interested  in representing characters’ minds. For the 
most part, the narrative alternates between  external focalization from without and 
external focalization from within. The narr ator moves freely in story space, and 
constantly shifts focus from one character to another, rarely following the same 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107
character over long stretches of story. Ther e is little genuine internal focalization. 
Indeed, the narrative is permeated by an auth orial presence, one that colors everything 
as at least latently grotesque, pathetic, absurd, or otherwise skewed. The narrator’s 
fetishistic attention to detail, macabre as of ten as not, and the highly stylized prose are 
among the key ingredients. Still, there is much representation of figural consciousness. 
Psychonarration, usually dissonant, is the prevailing consciousness technique. FID and 
interior monologue find some use as well, often for dramatic purposes. Despite the solid 
focus on characters’ minds, how ever, the representation of  consciousness is rarely 
serious or psychologically re alistic. Peake’s characters  are primarily types and 
caricatures – the sort of exaggerated fiction that allows the narrator to paint in broad 
strokes in keeping with his poetics of the grotesque and the macabre. Consider the 
focalization on the characters in the passage that finds the spindly Flay shadowing his 
would-be murderer, the monstrously fat Swelter, up a castle stairwell at night: 
 When Flay judged the silhouette [of Swelter] a good twelve paces distant he began to 
follow, and then there began the first of the epis odes – that of the stal k. If ever man stalked 
man, Flay stalked Swelter. It is to be doubt ed whether, when comp ared with the angular 
motions of Mr Flay, any man on earth could claim to stalk at all. He would have to do it 
with another word. 
 The very length and shape of his limbs and joints, the very formation of his head, and 
hands and feet were constructed as though for this process alone. Quite unconscious of the 
stick insect action, which his frame was undergoing, he followed the creeping dome. For 
Mr Swelter was himself – at all events in his own opinion – on the tail of his victim. The 
tail did not happen to be where he supposed it, two floors above, but he was moving with 
all possible stealth, nevertheless. At the top of  the first flight he would place his lantern 
carefully by the wall, for it was then that the candles began and continued at roughly equal 
distances, to cast their pale circles of light from niches in the walls. He began to climb. 
 If Mr Flay stalked, Mr Swelter insinuated. He insinuated himself through space. His 
body encroached, sleuth-like, from air-volume to air-volume, entering, filling and edging 
out of each in turn, the slow and vile belly preceding the horribly deliberate and potentially 
nimble progress of his fallen arches. 
 Flay could not see Swelter’s feet, only th e silhouetted dome, but by the way it ascended 
he could tell that the chef was moving one step at a time, his right foot always preceding his 
left, which he brought to the side of its d ace-like companion. He went up in slow, silent 
jerks in the way of children, invalids or obese women. Flay waited until he had rounded the 
curve of the stairs and was on the first landing before he followed, taking five stone steps at 
a time. (Peake 305−06) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108
The focalization-shifts between the two characters, the omniscient manner in which the 
narrator weaves in and out of their tran sparent minds, the grotesque and evocative 
imagery that effectively paints the persona lities on the characters, and the stylized 
language represent pure Peake. The perspective in the passage, as in the narrative at 
large, clearly originates from an authorial source. 
 J. R. R. Tolkien (1892 −1973) is generally regarded as  the single most important 
author in the fantasy genre, and The Lord of the Rings  (1954− 55) as the single most 
influential work of fantasy ( Fantasy 950− 51; Jakubowski 223 −24; Science 1194; see 
Fantasy 951; Jakubowski 227; Science 562, 1194− 96; Swinfen 1). As such, the two 
have provided a powerful incentive for au thorial narration in modern fantasy. The 
Fellowship of the Ring  (1954) is a case in point. In th e novel, external focalization, 
narratorial omniscience, and authorially or iented psychonarration dominate to the point 
of eclipsing all in-sto ry subjectivity. The narration is markedly reportorial throughout, 
and frequently takes on a panoramic or summ ative cast. The focalization shifts freely 
between the characters, and only rarely adopts the subjective perspective of a single 
character in a comprehensive fashion. Ther e is also much collective focalization on 
characters’ actions, emotions, thoughts, and perceptions that foregoes figural 
perspectivism in favor of mo re story-oriented narration. Such focalization is seldom 
reflectorized in the sense of  evoking collective in-story s ubjectivity. FID is completely 
overshadowed by psychonarration, and there ar e virtually no interi or monologues. In 
general, while there is plenty of representation of consciousness, the evocation of figural 
subjectivity in Tolkien remains scarce and superficial, always tinted with the narrator’s 
perspective and voice. The following passage , which sees the Fellowship begin their 
journey through Moria, is typical Tolkien: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109
 After only a brief rest they started on their way again. All were eager to get the journey 
over as quickly as possible, and were willing, tired as they were, to go on marching still for 
several hours. Gandalf walked in front as before. In his left hand he held up his glimmering 
staff, the light of which just showed the ground before his feet; in his right he held his 
sword Glamdring. Behind him came Gimli, his eyes glinting in the dim light as he turned 
his head from side to side. Behind the dwarf walked Frodo, and he had drawn the short 
sword, Sting. No gleam came from the blades of Sting or of Glamdring; and that was some 
comfort, for being the work of Elvish smiths in the Elder Days these swords shone with a 
cold light, if any Orcs were near at hand. Behind Frodo went Sam, and after him Legolas, 
and the young hobbits, and Boromir. In the dark at the rear, grim and silent, walked 
Aragorn. 
 The passage twisted round a few turns, and then began to descend. It went steadily 
down for a long while before it became level once again. The air grew hot and stifling, but 
it was not foul, and at times they felt currents  of cooler air upon their faces, issuing from 
half-guessed openings in the walls. There were many of these. In the pale ray of the 
wizard’s staff, Frodo caught glimpses of stairs and arches, and of other passages and 
tunnels, sloping up, or running steeply down, or opening blankly dark on either side. It was 
bewildering beyond hope of remembering. 
 Gimli aided Gandalf very little, except by his stout courage. At least he was not, as were 
most of the others, troubled by the mere darkness in itself. Often the wizard consulted him 
at points where the choice of way was doubtful; but it was always Gandalf who had the 
final word. The Mines of Moria were vast and intricate beyond the imagination of Gimli, 
Glóin’s son, dwarf of the mountain-race though he was. To Gandalf the far-off memories of 
a journey long before were now of little help, but even in the gloom and despite all 
windings of the road he knew whither he wished to go, and he did not falter, as long as 
there was a path that led towards his goal. (
Fellowship 407−08) 
The passage is pure external focalization: focalization on external details and events 
alternates with brief and superficial focalization on the characters’ minds. The latter 
includes both individual and collective exte rnal focalization from within. Figural 
subjectivity is entirely absent. The representation of consciousness is present merely to 
inform and to explain, not to flesh out character. As a fundamentally story-driven epic 
that aims to be mythic rather than realistic, 
The Fellowship of the Ring  has little use for 
psychological realism and serious figural perspectivism. 
 Unlike her three colleagues,  Ursula K. Le Guin (1929−) is more a humanist than a 
fantasist. It is therefore no surprise that A Wizard of Earthsea (1968), the first in a series 
of stories set in the titular otherworld, is th e most character-driven of the four classics 
discussed in this chapter. The narrative bl ends markedly omniscient, often panoramic 
and summative focalization with a closer focus on a single character, usually Ged, the 
protagonist. Le Guin’s narrator is very interested in Ged’s inner world, and, as a result, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110
the novel incorporates much representati on of figural consciousness. Still, this 
representation rarely takes the form of in ternal focalization as such, sustained or 
otherwise. The focalization from within typi cally carries an authorial touch, a sense of 
consciousness described rather  than experienced. It is typically the philosophically-
minded narrator’s rather than the character’s voice that emerges in the narration. 
Accordingly, reportorial psychonarration dominates the representation of consciousness. 
FID is infrequent, while interior monologue is  nonexistent. Much like the narrators in 
the other three narratives above, and de spite the authorial commentary and the 
occasional cues that suggest a future storytelling perspective, Le Guin’s narrator does 
not emerge as an explicit persona. The fo llowing example passage is an authorially 
narrated summary of Ged’s stay with his wi zard colleague Vetch and his two siblings, 
Yarrow and Murre: 
 They [Ged and Vetch] talked together late that night, and though always they came back 
to the bitter matter of what lay before Ged, yet their pleasure in being together overrode all; 
for the love between them was strong and st eadfast, unshaken by time or chance. In the 
morning Ged woke beneath his friend’s roof, and while he was still drowsy he felt such 
wellbeing [sic] as if he were in some place who lly defended from evil and harm. All day 
long a little of this dream-pea ce clung to his thoughts, and he took it, not as a good omen, 
but as a gift. It seemed likely to him that leaving this house he would leave the last haven 
he was to know, and so while the short dream lasted he would be happy in it. 
 Having affairs he must see to before he left Iffish, Vetch went off to the other villages of 
the island with the lad who served him as pr entice-sorcerer. Ged stayed with Yarrow and 
her brother, called Murre, who was between her and Vetch in age. He seemed not much 
more than a boy, for there was no gift or scourge of mage-power in him, and he had never 
been anywhere but Iffish, Tok, and Holp, and his life was easy and untroubled. Ged 
watched him with wonder and some envy, and exactly so he watched Ged: to each it 
seemed very queer that the other, so different, yet was his own age, nineteen years. Ged 
marvelled how one who had lived nineteen years could be so carefree. Admiring Murre’s 
comely, cheerful face he felt himself to be all lank and harsh, never guessing that Murre 
envied him even the scars that scored his f ace, and thought them th e track of a dragon’s 
claws and the very rune and sign of a hero. 
 The two young men were thus somewhat sh y with each other, but as for Yarrow she 
soon lost her awe of Ged, being in her own house and mistress of it. He was very gentle 
with her, and many were the questions she asked of him, for Vetch, she said, would never 
tell her anything. She kept busy those two days making dry wheatcakes [sic] for the 
voyagers to carry, and wrapping up dried fish and meat and other such provender to stock 
their boat, until Ged told her to stop, for he did not plan to sail clear to Selidor without a 
halt. (Le Guin 148−49) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111
                                                
The passage showcases both the narrator’ s attention to char acters’ thoughts and 
emotions, and the authorial confidence and understanding with which these are typically 
represented. The passage is also characteristic in its summative sweep. Despite the 
consistent focus on figural consciousness, the passage does not evoke the subjectivity of 
any of the characters. Le Guin’s narrator, like the narrators in Howard, Peake, and 
Tolkien, represents experience in the story world not through the in-story perspective of 
a character, but through her own authority as the storyteller. 
4.2. 1977: Brooks and Donaldson 
Maxim Jakubowski highlights the year 1977 as a turning point in modern fantasy (228, 
see 227). Two major American authors broke into print this year: Terry Brooks with 
The 
Sword of Shannara, the first in a trilogy of novels 17, and Stephen R. Donaldson with his 
seminal The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, the Unbeliever  (comprising the novels 
Lord Foul’ s Bane, The Illearth War, and The Power That Preserves ). Brooks was “one 
of the earliest of the blatant Tolkien imitators to achieve massive commercial success” 
(Jakubowski 227). 
The Sword of Shannara  effectively threw open “the quest trilogy 
floodgates”, and did as much to codify the Tolkien formula for epic fantasy as The Lord 
of the Rings  (ibid.). Donaldson, while also work ing within the quest epic framework, 
did something new instead: in Thomas Covena nt, he created what is possibly the first 
truly human, fully and realistically fles hed-out fantasy hero (see Jakubowski 228). 
Whereas Brooks is important in continui ng and popularizing the Tolkien tradition, 
Donaldson’s import lies precisely where he departs from this tradition: in the fully-
 
 
 
17 The Sword of Shannara Trilogy  includes the novels The Sword of Shannara , The Elfstones of 
Shannara (1982), and The Wishsong of Shannara  (1985). The trilogy is also know as The Original 
Shannara Trilogy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112
realized human element that he introduced in to the mainstream of modern fantasy. The 
human element is prefigured in earlier fa ntasy authors such as Leiber and Michael 
Moorcock (1939 −), of course, but Donaldson was the first to institute it centrally and 
comprehensively (see Jakubowski 225, 226, 228). Incidentally, the Thomas Covenant 
novels are also, to my knowledge, the first figural narratives in the genre. 
 Lord Foul’ s Bane, which I have chosen as the Donaldson example, is mostly 
narrated from Covenant’s subjective perspective. The narrative has a particularly strong 
figural foundation, since much of the story revolves around Covenant’s psychological 
and emotional relationship with the magical otherworld in which he finds himself, a 
reality he desperately refuses to believe as real. Covenant’s subjectivity colors and 
warps the representation throughout, which of ten results in vivid evocations of his 
voice. The use and distribution of consciousness  techniques bears this out: the narrative 
is a mixture of markedly consonant ps ychonarration, empathic FID, and figurally 
oriented interior monologue, with psychona rration being the principal technique. 
Interior monologues, in particular, are used to great effect, and frequently produce the 
most figurally charged passages. The na rrative seldom relinquishes Covenant’s 
perspective, but when it does so, it is always for a clear thematic purpose, usually to 
evoke an image of Covenant as an object of narratorial observation.  The stylized, often 
verbose narrative prose can sometimes call to mind a narrating agency as well. The 
figural effect, however, is ra rely compromised. To take an example, I quote at length 
from the scene where Covenant first wakes up in the Land, the otherworld to which he 
has been transported, or which he is in the process of dreaming. Covenant is sitting on a 
circular stone slab surrounde d by a low wall. Before him st ands a girl, and behind the 
girl, beyond the wall, rises a mountain, all else is blue sky: 
 Where – ? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113
 Awkwardly, as if his joints were half frozen with dread, he lurched to his feet. 
 At once, an immense panorama sprang into view below him, attacked his sight like a 
bludgeon of exhilaration and horror. He was on a stone platform four thousand feet or more 
above the earth. Birds glided and wheeled under his perch. The air was as clean and clear as 
crystal, and through it the great sweep of the landscape seemed immeasurably huge, so that 
his eyes ached with trying to see it all. Hills stretched away  directly under him; plains 
unrolled toward the horizons on both sides; a river angled silver in the sunlight out of the 
hills on his left. All was luminous with spring, as if it had just been born in that morning’s 
dew. 
 Bloody hell! 
 The giddy height staggered him. Vulture wings of darkness beat at his head. Vertigo 
whirled up at him, made the earth veer. 
 He did not know where he was. He had never seen this before. How had he come here? 
He had been hit by a police car, and Foul had brought him here. Foul had brought him here? 
 Brought me here? 
 Uninjured. 
 He reeled in terror toward the girl and the mountain. Three dizzy steps took him to the 
gap in the parapet. There he saw that he was on the top of a slim splinter of stone – at least 
five hundred feet long – that pointed obliquely up from the base of the cliff like a rigid 
finger accusing the sky. Stairs had been cut into the upper surface of th e shaft, but it was as 
steep as a ladder. 
 For one spinning instant, he thought dumbly, I’ve got to get out of here. None of this is 
happening to me. 
 Then the whole insanity of the situation recoiled on him, struck at him out of the 
vertiginous air like the claws of a condor. He stumbled; the maw of the fall gaped below 
him. He started to scream silently: 
 No! 
 As he pitched forward, the girl caught his arm, heaved at him. He swung and toppled to 
the stone within the parapet, pulled his knees up against his chest, covered his head. 
 Insane! he cried as if he were gibbering. 
 Darkness writhed like nausea inside his sk ull. Visions of madness burned across his 
mindscape. 
 How? 
 Impossible! 
 He had been crossing the street. He insisted upon that desperately. The light had been 
green. 
 Where? 
 He had been hit by a police car. 
 Impossible! 
 It had aimed itself straight for his heart, and it had hit him. 
 And not injured him? 
 Mad. I’m going mad mad mad. 
 And not injured him? 
 Nightmare. None of this is happening, is happening, is happening. 
 Through the wild whirl of his misery, another hand suddenly clasped his. The grip was 
hard, urgent; it caught him like an anchor. 
 Nightmare! I’m dreaming. Dreaming! 
 The thought flared through his panic like a revelation. Dreaming! Of course he was 
dreaming. Juggling furiously, he put the pieces together. He had been hit by a police car – 
knocked unconscious. Concussion. He might be out for hours – days. And while he was 
out, he was having this dream. 
 That was the answer. He clutched it as if it we re the girl’s grip on his straining hand. It 
steadied him against his vertigo, simplified his fear. But it was not enough. The darkness 
still swarmed at him as if he were carrion Foul had left behind. 
 How? 
 Where do you get dreams like this? 
 He could not bear to think about it; he would go mad. He fled from it as if it had already 
started to gnaw on his bones. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114
 Don’t think about it. Don’t try to understand. Madness – madness is the only danger. 
Survive! Get going. Do something. Don’t look back. 
 He forced his eyes open; and as he focused on the sunlight, the darkness receded, 
dropped away into the background and came hovering slowly behind him as if it were 
waiting for him to turn and face it, fall prey to it. (Donaldson 45−46) 
The passage evokes Covenant’s subjectivity and voice with visceral intensity. The 
internal focalization in the nove l is not always this pronoun ced, but the figural feel of 
the passage is typical of the narrative as a w hole. The use of interior monologues is also 
characteristic: they are never orthographi cally marked, and often go untagged. This 
grants them an immersive quality that is  missing from the monologues in, for example, 
Martin. Indeed, in additi on to being the first figural fantasy narrative, Lord Foul’ s Bane 
may well be the most figural fantasy narrative to date. 
 Toward the other end of the spectrum, Brooks’s The Sword of Shannara  reads 
primarily as neutrally toned ex ternal focalization, evoking ne ither the narrator’s nor the 
characters’ voices in any pronounced way. The narrative alternates between a closer 
focus on a single character on the one hand, and a collectiv e or continu ously shifting 
focus on two or more characters on the othe r. Both show scant commitment to figural 
perspectivism, and, as a result , the overriding feel of the narra tion is one of distance to 
character. Although the narrator focalizes figural minds quite  often, the focalization is 
usually superficial and rarely extended, and t ypically serves either action or exposition, 
which further explains the quality of distance. The narrator’s main interest seems to lie 
in telling and explaining the story; there is little room for psychologically immersive 
representation of consciousness.  This approach is reflecte d in the configuration of 
consciousness techniques: neutral or dissonant  psychonarration dominates, FID is rare 
and usually dramatic, and there seem to be no interior monologues. Here is an example: 
 Within half an hour, the company was on the path leading northward through the forests 
of the Wolfsktaag, moving steadily, without conversation for the most part, in the same 
order as before. Hendel had relinquished his spot as point man to the talented Menion Leah, 
who moved with the noiseless grace of a cat through the tangled boughs and brush over the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115
leaf-strewn floor. Hendel felt a certain respect  for the Prince of Leah. In time he would be 
unsurpassed by any woodsman. But the Dwarf kn ew as well that the highlander was brash 
and still inexperienced, and that in these lands only the cautious and the seasoned survived. 
Nevertheless, practice was the only way to learn, so the Dwarf grudgingly allowed the 
young tracker to lead the party, contenting himself with double-checking everything that 
appeared on the path before them. 
 One particularly disturbing detail caught the Dwarf’s attention almost immediately, 
although it completely escaped the notice of his companion. The trail failed to reveal any 
sign of the man who had come this way only hours earlier. Although he scanned the ground 
meticulously, Hendel was unable to discern ev en the slightest trace of a human footprint. 
The strips of white cloth appeared at regular intervals, just as Allanon had promised they 
would be. Yet there was no sign of his passage. Hendel knew the tales about the mysterious 
wanderer and had heard that he possessed extraordinary powers. But he had never dreamed 
that the man was such an accomplished tracker that he could completely hide his own trail. 
The Dwarf could not understand it, but decided to keep the matter to himself. 
 At the rear of the procession, Balinor, too, had been wondering about the enigmatic man 
from Paranor, the historian who knew so much that no one else had even suspected, the 
wanderer who seemed to have been everywhere and yet about whom so little was known. 
He had known Allanon off and on for many years while growing up in his father’s 
kingdom, but could only vaguely recall him, a dark stranger who had come and gone 
without warning, who had always seemed so kind to him, yet had never offered to reveal 
his own mysterious background. The wise men of all the lands knew Allanon as a scholar 
and a philosopher without equal. Others knew him only as a traveler who paid his way with 
good advice and who possessed a kind of grim common sense with which no one could find 
fault. Balinor had learned from him and had come to trust in him with what could almost be 
described as blind faith. Yet he had never really  understood the historian. He pondered that 
thought for a while, and then in what came as an almost casual revelation, he realized that 
in all the time he had spent with Allanon, he had never seen any sign of a change in his age. 
 The trail began to turn upward again and to  narrow as the great forest trees and heavy 
underbrush closed in like solid walls. Menion had followed the strips of cloth dutifully and 
had little doubt that they were on the right path, but automatically began to double-check 
himself as the going became no ticeably tougher than before. It  was almost noon when the 
trail branched unexpectedly, and a surprised Menion paused. 
 “This is strange. A fork in the trail a nd no marker—I can’t understand why Allanon 
would fail to leave a sign.” (Brooks, Sword 118−19) 
Most of the passage is take n up by focalization from within the characters, yet the 
impression is not that of apprehending the story world through their eyes. Instead, the 
effect is closer to an external report on th eir thoughts. Moreover, the focalization is not 
so much about fleshing out figur al consciousness as it is ab out explaining the character 
of Allanon (albeit from the somewhat limited perspective of the characters). Brooks’s 
narrative lacks Tolkien’s more stylized prose, and his narrator is more covert than the 
one in Tolkien, but both texts clearly share the same authorial, story-oriented quest 
fantasy framework. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116
4.3. From the 1980s to the 2000s: Toward Figural Fantasy 
Modern American fantasy of the early 1980 s seems to gravitate toward authorial 
narration. The narratives are no t as openly authoria l as the classics – the narrators are 
more covert, their language is less mannered, and the focalization tends to be neutrally 
toned as often as not – yet the authorial framework remains. The model is closer to 
Brooks than Donaldson. It is not until the end of the 1980s and the early 1990s that 
American fantasy begins to implement Dona ldson’s example in force. The 1990s stands 
out as something of a Renaissance for figural fantasy, a trend that continues unabated in 
the early 2000s. While the balance now appe ars to have tipped in favor of figural 
narration, the authoria l narrator is by no means gone. To  map out this development, I 
look at selected works by the following authors: David Drake, David and Leigh 
Eddings, Raymond E. Feist, Robin Hobb, Robert Jordan, Guy Gavriel Kay, and Tad 
Williams, as well as Brooks. With some authors, I provide contrasting readings between 
an earlier work and a later one. 
 David Eddings’s (1931 −) Pawn of Prophecy (1982), the first novel in the popular 
Belgariad series (1982 −84) about the magically fated boy Garion, later Belgarion, is 
interesting in that it is an authorial narrativ e that resembles a figural one. The narration 
is technically restricted to what Garion know s and perceives, yet th is perspectivism is 
hardly ever implemented as internal focal ization. Despite the close focus on Garion, the 
focalization tends toward the external: inst ead of apprehending the story world through 
Garion’s eyes, the perspectival effect is ty pically one of viewing the story world over 
Garion’s shoulder. This looking-over-the-s houlder quality frequently takes on a 
reflectorized cast as the narrator empathical ly identifies with the hero’s mood or 
situation. For the most part, however, the focalization evokes neither Garion’s 
subjective perspective nor the narrator’s au thorial one in any marked way (although 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117
there is usually the feeling of being safe  and sound in the hands of an infallible 
observer). Psychonarration, ranging between neutral and subtly dissonant, dominates the 
representation of consciousness almost comp letely. There are no interior monologues, 
and only a few FID passages. In general, th e penetrations inside Garion’s mind tend to 
be short-lived and superficial. Eddings’s narrator, in the classic que st fantasy tradition, 
is much more interested in story than cons ciousness. The following passage is a case in 
point. The fourteen-year-old Garion is moping after having been left out of an important 
meeting: 
 Garion sat alone, wounded to the quick by his exclusion. He was at an age where his 
self-esteem was very tender, and inwardly he wr ithed at the lack of regard implicit in his 
not being invited to join them. Hurt and offended, he sulkily left the great hall and went to 
visit his boar which hung in an ice-filled cooling room just off the kitchen. At least the boar 
had taken him seriously. 
 One could, however, spend only so much time in the company of a dead pig without 
becoming depressed. The boar did not seem nearly so big as he had when he was alive and 
charging, and the tusks were impressive but neither so long nor so sharp as Garion 
remembered them. Besides, it was cold in the cooling room and sore muscles stiffened 
quickly in chilly places. 
 There was no point in trying to visit Barak. The red-bearded man had locked himself in 
his chamber to brood in blackest melancholy and refused to answer his door, even to his 
wife. And so Garion, left entirely on his own, moped about for a while and then decided 
that he might as well explore this vast pal ace with its dusty, unused chambers and dark, 
twisting corridors. He walked for what seemed hours, opening doors and following 
hallways that sometimes ended abruptly against blank stone walls. 
 The palace of Anheg was enormous, having been, as Barak had explained, some three 
thousand years and more in construction. One southern wing was so totally abandoned that 
its entire roof had fallen in centuries ago. Garion wandered there for a time in the second-
floor corridors of the ruin, his mind filled with gloomy thoughts of mortality and transient 
glory as he looked into rooms where snow lay thickly on ancient beds and stools and the 
tiny tracks of mice and squirrels ran everywhere. And then he came to an unroofed corridor 
where there were other tracks, those of a man. The footprints were quite fresh, for there was 
no sign of snow in them and it had snowed heavily the night before. At first he thought the 
tracks might be his own and that he had somehow circled and come back to a corridor he 
had already explored, but the footprints were much larger than his. (Eddings, Pawn 
208−09) 
Despite the consistent focus on Garion’s t houghts and emotions, his subjectivity does 
not emerge in a figural manner. Still, the passage is not entirely neutral in tone: there is a 
subtle touch of good-natured wit to the narration that is sympathetic to the young hero’s 
misery. This wit originates in the narrator rather than in Garion himself, and creates the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118
                                                
sort of faint reflectorization that often hedges th e narrative. Eddings’s narrator is by no 
means overt, but he is nonetheless an unmistakable authorial presence. 
 Raymond E. Feist’s (1945 −) Magician: Apprentice  (1982/1992) 18 is formally 
identical to Brooks’s The Sword of Shannara . It is mostly neutra lly toned, reportorial 
narration that neither espouses solid figural subjectivity nor shows an overtly authorial 
narrator. The framework of external focalizatio n is apparent in the authorial strategies 
scattered across the narration, chiefly authorial knowledge a nd unrestricted  shifts in 
focalization. The narrative typically stays clos e to one of the characters, and includes 
much representation of figural consciousness. The internal focus on character is usually 
superficial, however, skimming the characters ’ minds rather than fleshing them out as 
in-story subjectivities of tangible figurality. Internal focalization is therefore rare, with 
the narrative perspective tending toward a neutral cast. Neutrally toned psychonarration 
is the dominant consciousness technique; FI D is infrequent, although usually empathic 
in tone (a departure from Brooks); and in terior monologues, orthographically unmarked 
yet tagged, are virtually nonexist ent. For example, consider the narrative perspective in 
the passage below. Duke Borric’s party from Crydee, along with the boy Pug who is one 
of the main characters in the novel, arrives at Duke Kerus’s palace in Salador: 
 Riding through the city, Pug realized how much of a frontier town Crydee was. In spite 
of Lord Borric’s political power, he was still Lord of a frontier province. 
 Along the streets, citizens stood gawking at the western Duke from the wild frontier of 
the Far Coast. Some cheered, for it seemed  like a parade, but most stood quietly, 
disappointed that the Duke and his party looked like other men, rather than blood-drenched 
barbarians. 
 When they reached the courtyard of the pa lace, household servants ran to take their 
horses. A household guard showed the soldiers from Krondor to the soldiers’ commons, 
where they would rest before returning to the Prince’s city. Another, with a captain’s badge 
of rank on his tunic, led Borric’s party up the steps of the building. 
 
 
 
18 Magician (1982) originally came out as a truncated sing le volume. In 1992, to celebrate the novel’s 
tenth anniversary, the Author’s Preferred Edition wa s published, with much of the cut material now 
reinserted. Both editions have also been published in two parts: Magician: Apprentice (1986/1994) 
and Magician: Master (1986/1994). The contents are identical to the single-volume editions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119
 Pug looked with wonder, for this palace was even larger than the Prince’s in Krondor. 
They walked through several outer rooms, then reached an inner courtyard. Here fountains 
and trees decorated a garden, beyond which stood the central palace. Pug realized that the 
building they had passed through was simply one of the buildings surrounding the Duke’s 
living quarters. He wondered what use Lord Kerus could possibly have for so many 
buildings and such a large staff. 
 They crossed the garden courtyard and mounted another series of steps toward a 
reception committee that stood in the door of the central palace. Once this building might 
have been a citadel, protecting the surrounding town, but Pug couldn’t bring himself to 
imagine it as it might have been ages ago, for numerous renovations over the years had 
transformed an ancient keep into a glittering thing of glass and marble. 
 Duke Kerus’s chamberlain, an old dried-up stick of a man with a quick eye, knew every 
noble worth noting—from the borders of Kesh in the south to Tyr-Sog in the north—by 
sight. His memory for faces and facts had often saved Duke Kerus from embarrassment. By 
the time Borric had made his way up the broad stairway from the courtyard, the 
chamberlain had provided Kerus with a few personal facts and a quick evaluation of the 
right amount of flattery required. (Feist, 
Magician 308−09) 
The occasional psychonarration on Pug’s thoughts and perceptions does little to anchor 
the focalization in Pug’s subjectivity. Instead, the effect is closer to  externally focalized 
exposition and description, nominally motiv ated by Pug’s consciousness. The sudden 
shift from Pug to Duke Kerus’s chamberlain in the last paragraph, followed by authorial 
exposition on the latter, is typical Feist. Mu ch like the narrators in Brooks and Eddings, 
Feist’s rarely has time for in-depth focus on character. 
 For Jakubowski, The Fionavar Tapestry  trilogy (1984 −87) by Guy Gavriel Kay 
(1954−) is one of the decisive works responsible for securing a true human element for 
modern fantasy (228). Unlike Donaldson’s Lord Foul’ s Bane, however, Kay’s novels are 
not figural narratives. The opening novel, The Summer Tree (1984), combines authorial 
narration and figural narration in almost equa l measure. On the one hand, there is much 
omnisciently oriented exposition, descrip tion, panoramic narration, and summary that 
suggest an authorial framewor k. External focalization on figural consciousness is also 
common, though seldom dissonant. On the other hand, the focus on the main characters 
often develops into extended internal focalization, increasingly so toward the end. The 
novel includes whole chapters th at consist solely of  close internal focalization. There is 
almost a kind of tug of war between these tw o modes, the classic authorial paradigm of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120
epic storytelling and the new figural paradigm with its focus on character. Still, what is 
constant throughout the novel, is  a keen interest in charac ter. As might be expected, 
psychonarration is the princi pal technique for representi ng consciousness, ranging 
mainly between markedly consonant and neutral in tone. The narrative also incorporates 
a solid amount of empathic FID. To ex emplify the two competing strains running 
through the narrative, here are two separate quotes: 
He landed badly, but the reflexes of an athl ete took him rolling through the fall, and at the 
end of it he was on his feet, unhurt. Very angry, though. 
 He had opted out, damn it! What the hell right did Kim Ford have to grab his arm and 
haul him to another world? What the. . . . 
 He stopped; the fury draining as reali zation came down hard. She had, she really had 
taken him to another world. 
 A moment ago he had been in a room in the Park Plaza Hotel, now he found himself 
outdoors in darkness with a cool wind blowing, and a forest nearby; looking the other way, 
he saw wide rolling grasslands stretching away as far as he could see in the moonlight. 
 He looked around for the others, and then as the fact of isolation slowly came home, 
Dave Martyniuk’s anger gave way to fear. They weren’t friends of his, that was for sure, but 
this was no time or place to have ended up alone. 
 They couldn’t be far, he thought, managing to keep control. Kim Ford had had his arm; 
surely that meant she couldn’t be far away, her and the others, and that Lorenzo Marcus guy 
who’d got him into this in the first place. And was going to get him out, or deal with severe 
bodily pain, Martyniuk vowed. Notwithstanding the provisions of the Criminal Code. 
 Which reminded him: looking down, he saw that he was still clutching Kevin Laine’s 
Evidence notes. 
 The absurdity, the utter incongruousness in  this night place of wind and grass acted, 
somehow, to loosen him. He took a deep breath, like before the opening jump in a game. It 
was time to get his bearings. Boy Scout time. (Kay 241−42) 
 
 They woke, all three of them, on soft gr ass in the morning light. The horses grazed 
nearby. They were on the very fringes of the forest; southward a road ran from east to west, 
and beyond it lay low hills. One farmhouse could be  seen past the road, and overhead birds 
sang as if it were the newest morning of the world. Which it was. 
 In more ways than the obvious, after the cataclysms that the night had known. Such 
powers had moved across the face of Fionavar as  had not been gathered since the worlds 
were spun and the Weaver named the gods. Iorweth Founder had not endured that blast of 
Rangat, seen that hand in the sky, nor had Conary known such thunder in Mörnirwood, or 
the white power of the mist that exploded up from the Summer Tree, through the body of 
the sacrifice. Neither Revor nor Amairgen had ever seen a moon like the one that had sailed 
that night, nor had the Baelrath blazed so in answer on any ot her hand in the long telling of 
its tale. And no man but Ivor dan Banor had ever seen Imraith-Nimphais bear her Rider 
across the glitter of the stars. 
 Given such a gathering, a concatenation of powers such that the worlds might never be 
the same, how small a miracle might it be said to be that Dave awoke with his friends in the 
freshness of that morning on the southern edge of Pendaran, with the high road from North 
Keep to Rhoden running past, and a horn lying by his side. 
 A small miracle, in the light of all that had shaken the day and night before, but that 
which grants life where death was seen as certain can never be inconsequential, or even less 
than wondrous, to those who are the objects of its intercession. 
 So the three of them rose up, in awe and great joy, and told their stories to each other 
while morning’s bird-song spun and warbled overhead. (Kay 323−24) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121
The strong figurality of the first quote and th e epic-omniscient sweep of the second one 
aptly typify the two extremes between which The Summer Tree oscillates. In combining 
an authorial framework with substantial, ofte n close internal focalization, the novel can 
be seen as a figural upgrade from Leiber: rath er than an authorial narrative with figural 
tendencies, The Summer Tree  is literally an authorial- figural narrative. Jakubowski’s 
description of Kay’s work as “synthesizing the human frailt ies introduced to the genre 
by Donaldson with the exemplary myth creat ion of Tolkien’s tradition” is equally 
appropriate (228). Jakubowski may be talk ing about thematics, but his comment 
unwittingly reflects the convergence of two different narrative modes in Kay. 
 Tad Williams’s (1957 −) The Dragonbone Chair  (1988), the first volume in the 
Memory, Sorrow and Thorn  series (1988− 93), is probably the first figural fantasy 
narrative since Donaldson’s Covenant novels. The story is primarily told through the 
perspective of the main character, the scu llion Simon. Supporting reflector characters 
crop up as the story progres ses, but the most substantial and immersive internal 
focalization is reserved for Simon. The narration frequently turns inward on the 
focalizing consciousness, betraying a s ound psychological foundation similar to 
Donaldson. Consonant psychonarration and em pathic FID are the principal means for 
representing figural consciousness. Much like in Martin, interior monologues amount to 
a relevant though infrequent phenomenon;  the monologues are always italicized, 
sometimes tagged, and equal parts dramatic and empathic. Together, the three 
techniques imbue the narrative with vivid figurality. Here is a prototypical passage: 
 Simon slumped back down into the grass, clasping his hands behind his head. He had 
slept a long while: the rich sun was almost straight overhead. It made the hairs on his 
forearms glow like molten copper; the tips of hi s ragged shoes looked so far away he could 
almost imagine them the peaks of distant mountains. 
 A sudden cold sliver of memory pierced his drowsiness. How had he gotten here? 
What. . . ? 
 A dark presence at his shoulder brought him quickly onto his knees; he turned to see the 
tree-mantled mass of Thisterborg looming behind him, not half a league away. Every detail 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
was stunningly clear, a pattern of precise edges; but for the troubling throb of memory it 
might have seemed comfortable and cool, a placid hill rising through encircling trees, 
banded with shade and bright green leaves. Along its crest were the Anger Stones, faint 
gray points against the blue sky. 
 The vivid spring day was now corrupted by a mist of dream—what had happened last 
night? He had fled the castle, of course—those moments, his last with Morgenes, were 
burned into his very heart—but after? What were these nightmarish memories? Endless 
tunnels? Elias? A fire, and white-haired demons? 
 Dreams—idiot, bad dreams. Terror and tiredness and more terror. I ran through the 
graveyard at night, fell down at last, slept and dreamed.
 But the tunnels, and . . . a black casket? Hi s head still hurt, but th ere was also an odd 
sense of numbness, as if ice had been laid on an injury. The dream had seemed so real. Now 
it was distant, slippery and meaningless—a dark pang of fear and pain that would drift 
away like smoke if he allowed it to—or, at least, he hoped it would. He pushed the 
memories down, burying them as deeply as he could, and closing his mind over them like 
the lid of a box. 
 It’ s not as though I don’t have enough things to worry about. . . .
 The bright sun of Belthainn Day had smoothed some of the kinks from his muscles, but 
he was still sore . . . and very hungry. He clambered stiffly to his feet and brushed the 
clinging grass from his tattered, mud-smeared clothes. He stole another look at Thisterborg. 
Did the ashes of a great fire still smolder among the stones there? Or had the shattering 
events of the day before pushed him for a while into madness? The hill stood, impassive; 
whatever secrets might lurk beneath the cloak of trees, or nestle in the crown of stones, 
Simon did not want to know. There were already too many hollows that needed filling. 
 Turning his back on Thisterborg, he faced across the downs to the dark breakfront of the 
forest. Staring across the vast expanse of open land, he felt a deep sorrow welling up within 
him, and pity for himself. He was so alone! They had taken everything from him, and left 
him without home or friends. He slapped his hands together in anger and felt the palms 
sting. Later! Later he would cry; now he had to be a man. But it was all so horribly unfair! 
 He breathed in and out deeply, and looked again to the distant woods. Somewhere near 
that thin line of shadow, he knew, ran the Old Forest Road. It rolled for miles along 
Aldheorte’s southern perimeter, sometimes at a distance, sometimes sidling up close to the 
old trees like a teasing child. In other places it actually passed beneath the forest’s eaves, 
winding through dark bowers and silent, sun-arrowed clearings. A few small villages and an 
occasional roadhouse nestled in the forest’s shadow. 
 Perhaps I can find some work to do—even to earn a meal, anyway. I feel hungry as a 
bear . . . a just-woken bear, at that. Starved! I haven’t eaten since before . . . before . . .
 He bit his lip, hard. There was nothing else to do but start walking. (Williams 187− 88) 
Here, as in much of the narrative, figural  consciousness and voice em erge with tangible 
subjectivity. 
 There is some external focalization in Williams, proportionally more than in either 
Donaldson or Martin, but it is never marked ly authorial and only rarely extended. The 
opening chapter, dominated by covert external focalization, seems to be the only clear 
exception to this rule, with pockets of figurality scattered here and there. These sections 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123
                                                
in Williams seem almost like leftovers from the classic Tolkien paradigm. 19 In overall 
effect, however, The Dragonbone Chair rivals Lord Foul’ s Bane and A Game of Thrones 
in its figurality. 
 Brooks returns to the Shannara universe in The Scions of Shannara  (1990), the 
opening volume to The Heritage of Shannara tetralogy (1990−93). While The Scions of 
Shannara is no less an epic quest fantasy than, for example, The Sword of Shannara , 
there is a marked difference: the former read s mainly as a figural narrative, with the 
narrative perspective generally re stricted to a single in-story subjectivity. Yet, despite 
this figural orientation, the narrative does not appropriate the reflectors’ voices 
comprehensively or consistently. The focalizat ion may be internal, but  its figural effect 
is rarely pronounced. There are at least two reasons for this. First, although the narration 
favors consonant psychonarration and empathic FID in representing figural 
consciousness, neither technique is used to the same effect as, for example, in Williams 
above. Second, the shadow of authorial na rration still lingers over Brooks’s poetics. 
Formal denomination is frequent, and can a ppear anywhere; exposition is sometimes so 
overt and extensive that the figural framework threatens to tear at the seams; chapters 
often open and close with authorial flourish;  and the FID sometimes takes on a didactic 
cast as though the narrator/implied author was speaking through the characters, usurping 
their voices in order to preach his own point of view. But even so, the figural framework 
is usually unmistakable: 
 Par Ohmsford drifted. 
 
 
 
19 In discussing his approach to writing the novel, Williams notes that there is a “pseudo-Tolkien tone” 
to the narration that “still lingers in the initial paragraphs of the first chapter, influenced not just by 
Tolkien but by Lord Dunsany and Mervyn Peake” (vii). Following this “false start”, Williams “quickly 
found a more naturalistic and personal way to speak to [his] readers” (ibid.). Although Williams does 
not talk about authorial and figural narration as such, his comments on tone and voice revealingly 
touch on these. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124
 He did not sleep, for in sleeping he would dream and his dreams haunted him. Nor did 
he wake, for in waking he would find the reality that he was so desperate to escape. 
 He simply drifted, half in and half out of  any recognizable existence, tucked somewhere 
back in the gray in-between of what is and isn’t, where his mind could not focus and his 
memories remained scattered, where he was warm and secure from the past and future both, 
curled up deep inside. There was a madness upon him, he knew. But the madness was 
welcome, and he let it claim him without a struggle. It made him disoriented and distorted 
his perceptions and his thoughts. It gave him shelter. It cloaked him in a shroud of nonbeing 
that kept everything walled away—and that was what he needed. 
 Yet even walls have chinks and cracks that let through the light, and so it was with his 
madness. He sensed things—whispers of life from the world he was trying so hard to hide 
from. He felt the blankets that wrapped him and the bed on which he lay. He saw candles 
burning softly through a liquid haze, pinpricks of yellow brightness like islands on a dark 
sea. Strange beasts looked down at him from cabinets, shelves, boxes, and dressers, and 
their faces were formed of cloth and fur with  button eyes and sewn noses, with ears that 
drooped and tipped, and with studied, watchful poses that never changed. He listened as 
words were spoken, floating through the air as motes of dust on streamers from the sun. 
 “He’s very sick, lovely Damson,” he heard one voice say. 
 And the other replied, “He’s protecting himself, Mole.” 
 Damson and Mole. He knew w ho they were, although he couldn’t quite place them. He 
knew as well that they were talking about hi m. He didn’t mind. What they were saying 
didn’t make any difference. 
 Sometimes he saw their faces through the chinks and cracks. 
 The Mole was a creature with  round, furry features and large, questioning eyes who 
stood above him, looking thoughtful. Sometimes he brought the strange beasts to sit close 
by. He looked very much the same as the beasts, Par thought. He called them by name. He 
spoke with them. But the beasts never answered back. 
 The girl fed him sometimes. Damson. She spooned soup into his mouth and made him 
drink, and he did so without argument. There was something perplexing about her, 
something that fascinated him, and he tried talking to her once or twice before giving up. 
Whatever it was he wished to say refused to show itself. The words ran away and hid. His 
thoughts faded. He watched her face fade with them. (Brooks, 
Scions 412−13) 
The formal denomination that opens the passa ge, and the heavily descriptive narration 
of a mental state that should be indescribable may suggest an  authorial narrator, yet the 
perspectivism running through the passage clearly takes its cue from Par rather than any 
external agency. Despite the vestiges of authorial narration, a nd the underdeveloped 
evocation of in-story consciousness, Brooks has clearly crossed over into the figural. 
 The next three novels, published in the 1990s, are all figural narratives. There are, 
of course, differences in thei r implementation. Like Brooks’s The Scions of Shannara , 
Robert Jordan’s (1948 −) The Eye of the World  (1990) employs internal focalization 
centrally, but not in as pronounced a fashio n as the more figurally charged fantasy 
narratives. In particular, it lacks the strongly  empathic FID texture that we find, for 
example, in Martin. Like wise, David Drake’s (1945 −) Lord of the Isles  (1997) reads 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125
                                                
mostly as internal focalization that skirts strong figurality. But rather than lacking in 
FID as such, this effect is mainly due to the narrative being organized into exceptionally 
short chapters, typically two to four pages long. There is simply no room for extended 
passages of focalization from within. Brief, s ubtle authorial slippages are also frequent 
in Drake, as though the figural paradigm has yet to come to its own. By comparison, 
Robin Hobb’s (1952−) 
Ship of Magic (1998) is a pure figural narrative formally similar 
to Martin’s. Its internal focalization is immersive and often pronounced, and its strong 
figurality is on a par with the figurality in  Martin and Donaldson. Like Martin, Hobb 
uses consonant psychonarration and empathic FID to great effect. External focalization, 
usually in the guise of authorial denominati on or brief visual portraits of reflector 
characters, is negligible.20
 The following excerpts exemplify the charac teristic figural perspectivism in the 
three novels. Rand, the principal reflector in Jordan’s The Eye of the World, escapes his 
home as it is being overrun by strange humanoid beasts: 
 “Run, lad! Hide in the woods!” The bodies in  the doorway jerked as others outside tried 
to pull them clear. Tam thrust a shoulder under the massive table; with a grunt he heaved it 
over atop the tangle. “There are too many to hold! Out the back! Go! Go! I’ll follow!” 
 Even as Rand turned away, shame filled him that he obeyed so quickly. He wanted to 
stay and help his father, though he could not imagine how, but fear had him by the throat, 
and his legs moved on their own. He dashed from the room, toward the back of the house, 
as fast as he had ever run in his life. Crashes and shouts from the front door pursued him. 
 He had his hands on the bar across the back door when his eye fell on the iron lock that 
was never locked. Except that Tam had done just that tonight. Letting the bar stay where it 
was, he darted to a side window, flung up the sash and threw back the shutters. Night had 
replaced twilight completely. The full moon and drifting clouds made dappled shadows 
chase one another across the farmyard. 
 Shadows, he told himself. Only shadows. The back door creaked as someone outside, or 
something, tried to push it open. His mouth went dry. A crash shook the door in its frame 
and lent him speed; he slipped through the window like a hare going to ground, and 
cowered against the side of the house. Inside the room, wood splintered like thunder. 
 
 
 
20 Jordan’s The Eye of the World is the first volume of the ongoing The Wheel of Time series, currently in 
its eleventh volume, with the twelfth and supposedly final volume to be published in 2008. Drake’s 
Lord of the Isles  is the first book in the Howard-influenced series by the same name. At present, the 
series numbers seven books, and is expected to wrap up in two more. Hobb’s Ship of Magic is the first 
in a trilogy of books titled The Liveship Traders (1998−2000). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126
 He forced himself up to a crouch, made himself peer inside, just with one eye, just at the 
corner of the window. In the dark he could not make out much, but more than he really 
wanted to see. The door hung askew, and shadowed shapes moved cautiously into the room, 
talking in low, guttural voices. Rand understood none of what was said; the language 
sounded harsh, unsuited to a human tongue. Axes and spears and spiked things dully 
reflected stray glimmers of moonlight. Boots scraped on the floor, and there was a rhythmic 
click, as of hooves, as well. 
 He tried to work moisture back into his mouth. Drawing a deep, ragged breath, he 
shouted as loudly as he could. “They’re coming in the back!” The words came out in a 
croak, but at least they came out. He had not been sure they would. “I’m outside! Run, 
father!” With the last word he was sprinting away from the farmhouse. 
 Coarse-voiced shouts in the strange tongue raged from the back room. Glass shattered, 
loud and sharp, and something thudded heavily to the ground behind him. He guessed one 
of them had broken through the window rather than try to squeeze through the opening, but 
he did not look back to see if he was right. Like a fox running from hounds he darted into 
the nearest moon-cast shadows as if headed for the woods, then dropped to his belly and 
slithered back to the barn and its larger, deeper shadows. Something fell across his 
shoulders, and he thrashed about, not sure if he was trying to fight or escape, until he 
realized he was grappling with the new hoe handle Tam had been shaping. 
 Idiot! For a moment he lay there, trying to stop panting. Coplin fool idiot!  At last he 
crawled on along the back of the barn, dragging the hoe handle with him. It was not much, 
but it was better than nothing. Cautiously he looked around the corner at the farmyard and 
the house. 
 Of the creature that had jump ed out after him there was no sign. It could be anywhere. 
Hunting him, surely. Even creeping up on him at that very moment. (68−70) 
Sharina is disgusted when she realizes th at Asera and the wizard Meder mean to 
sacrifice two chickens in order to su mmon a fair wind for sailing in Drake’s Lord of the 
Isles: 
 “Surely you’ve killed a chicken before, girl?” Asera said in amazement. Shadows from 
the setting sun deepened the furrows of her frown. 
 “I’ve killed hundreds,” Sharina said flatly. “More than that, I suppose. To eat. I don’t 
like magic and I’m not going to be part of it.” 
 She turned and walked away, he r body shaking. “I don’t understand,” Meder called after 
her. 
 Sharina didn’t understand either. She’d lived too close to chickens to have any affection 
for them. They were quarrelsome, stupid, an d demanding; the best thing about a chicken 
was the way it tasted fried. She’d often snapped the necks of a pair like those the sailor 
held, gutted them with a paring knife, and had them ready to scald the feathers for plucking 
in less than a minute. 
 But the thought of cutting the birds’ throats just to pour their blood out made her skin 
crawl and her stomach turn. She didn’t even like the idea of reboarding the ship in the 
morning and knowing where the wind that drove it came from. 
 Her eyes focused. She’d walked into the midst of the Blood Eagles. Ningir put out a 
hand toward her, but Wainer waved him back silently. 
 Nonnus was alert, but he watched Sharina only peripherally. She glanced over her 
shoulder and saw Asera and the wizard going into the shelter while the sailor with the 
chickens waited to follow. The hermit relaxed slightly. 
 Sharina felt sudden hot anger. Was she completely a child who had to be protected from 
a spindly boy she could have broken over her knee? 
 She knew the reaction was unjustified, a displacement of her formless disgust at 
Meder’s blood magic, but she felt it nonetheless. She glared at Nonnus, then turned to the 
Blood Eagles’ officer and said in a clear voi ce, “Your name is Wainer, I believe? I have 
some questions to ask you in private.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
127
 A soldier snickered, then swallowed his reaction in a cough as Wainer glared at him. 
Wainer’s expression cleared to neutrality and he said, “If you like, mistress. I think if we go 
downwind, we can speak and stay in plain sight so nobody misunderstands.” 
 Sharina nodded and strode briskly beyond the limits of the scattered encampment. She 
glanced over her shoulder. Nonnus watched without expression, but he didn’t follow. 
(99−100) 
Sitting by her dying husband’s bedside, Ronica Vestrit, the matriarch of a once-powerful 
Liveship trader family from Bingtown, reflect s on her grief, her husband, and the maid 
Rache in Hobb’s Ship of Magic: 
Ephron Vestrit was dy ing. Ronica looked at her husband’ s diminished face and impressed 
the thought on her mind. Ephron Vestrit was dying. She felt a wave of anger, followed by 
one of annoyance with him. How could he do this to her? How could he die now and leave 
her to handle everything by herself? 
 Somewhere beneath the tides of those supe rficial emotions she knew the cold deep 
current of her grief sought to pull her down and drown her. She fought savagely to be free 
of it, fought to keep feeling only the anger and irritation. Later, she told herself. Later, when 
I have pulled through this and have done all the things I must do, then I will stop and feel. 
Later. 
 For now she folded her lips tight in exasperation. She dipped a cloth in the warm 
balsam-scented water, and gently wiped first his face and then his lax hands. He stirred 
lightly under her ministrations, but did not waken. She had not expected him to. She’d 
given him the poppy syrup twice today already, to try to keep the pain at bay. Perhaps for 
now, the pain had no control over him. She hoped so. 
 She wiped gently at his beard again. That clumsy Rache had let him dribble broth all 
over himself again. It was as if the woman just didn’t care to do things properly. Ronica 
supposed she should just send her back to Davad Restart; she hated to, for the woman was 
young and intelligent. Surely she did not deserve to end up as a slave. 
 Davad had simply brought the woman to her house one day. Ronica had assumed she 
was a relative or guest of Davad, for when she was not staring sorrowfully at nothing, her 
genteel diction and manners had suggested she was well-born. Ronica had been shocked 
when Davad had bluntly offered the woman to her as a servant, saying he dared not keep 
her in his own household. He’d never fully explained that statement, and Rache refused to 
say anything at all on the topic. Ronica supposed  that if she sent Rache back to Davad, he 
would shrug and send her on to Chalced to be  sold as a slave. While she remained in 
Bingtown, she was nominally an indentured servant. She still had a chance to regain a life 
of her own, if she would but try. Instead Rache was simply refusing to adapt to her changed 
status. She obeyed the orders she was given, but not with anything like grace or goodwill. 
 In fact, as the weeks passed, it seemed to Ronica that Rache had become more and more 
grudging in her duties. Yesterday Ronica had asked her to take charge of Selden for the day, 
and the woman had looked stricken. Her grandson was only seven, but the woman seemed 
to have a strange aversion to him. She had shaken her head, fiercely and mutely, her eyes 
lowered, until Ronica had ordered her off to the kitchen instead. Perhaps she was seeing 
how far she could push her new mistress before Ronica ordered her punished. Well, she’d 
find that Ronica Vestrit was not the kind of woman who ordered her servants beaten or their 
rations reduced. If Rache could not find it w ithin herself to accept living comfortably in a 
well-appointed house with relatively light du ties and a gentle mistress, well, then, she 
would have to go back to Davad, and eventua lly take her place on the block and see what 
fate dealt her next. That was all there was to it. A shame, for the woman had promise. 
 A shame, too, that despite Davad’s kindness in offering Rache’s services to her, the Old 
Trader was perilously close to becoming a slave dealer. She had never thought to see one of 
the old family lines enticed in to such a scurrilous trade. Ronica shook her head, and put 
both Rache and Davad out of her mind. She had other, more important things to think of 
beside Rache’s sour temperament and Davad’s dabbling in semi-legal professions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128
                                                
 After all, Ephron was dying. (50 −51) 
Despite differences in technique and style, al l three narratives clearly operate primarily 
through restricted perspective, and thus shar e figural narration as their main narrative 
paradigm. 
 Despite the upsurge of figural narratives , authorial narration has not disappeared 
from the modern fantasy arena. The authoria l paradigm survives, for the most part, in 
the works of established authors who began writing fantasy before the proliferation of 
figural fantasy in the 1990s. This is not the cas e with all such authors, of course, as the 
extracts from Brooks illustrate. Eddings (along with his wife Leigh) and Feist, however, 
are among those whose narrative po etics, at least in terms of  narrative situation, have 
changed very little over the years. 
 Much like Pawn of Prophecy , David and Leigh Eddings’s 21 The Redemption of 
Althalus (2000) is a covertly authorial narrativ e that maintains a relatively close focus 
on a single protagonist, in this case Althalus , yet remains figurally inaccessible. As with 
Garion, Althalus’s subjective perspective is rarely evoked through internal focalization, 
pronounced or otherwise. The narrator’s pers pective also goes unmarked, although the 
narration is frequently undercut by a kind of authorial or reflectorized sympathy for the 
protagonist typical of the Eddingses. In gene ral, the narrator is more concerned with 
story and plot than any solid or serious re presentation of figural consciousness. As a 
result, such representations tend to be lightweight and shallow. Neutrally toned 
psychonarration is the norm, whereas FID is  infrequent and of ten only seemingly 
empathic. The authorial orientation, and the overarching psychol ogical distance to 
 
 
 
21 Leigh Eddings, David Eddings’s wife, is the co-author of all the Eddings novels, and was first 
acknowledged as such in Belgarath the Sorcerer (1995). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129
character are augmented by two further phenomena: the summative quality of the 
narration, externally focalized as a rule, and the underdeveloped evocation of story 
space. The narration seldom projects a sense of  inhabiting a tangible story world. In 
this, 
The Redemption of Althalus  may well be more authorial than Pawn of Prophecy . 
There are also copious amounts of dialogue th at not only overshadow the narration, but 
also often double for narration. The overall effect, however, remains the same in the two 
novels: authorial narration that  evokes neither th e characters’ nor the narrator’s 
perspectives in a marked fashion, yet often reflects a light empathy for the former. Here 
is a brief example: 
The wedding day of Albron and Astarell dawned clear and cold. Because of the season, the 
decorations in the hall were largely limited to evergreen boughs and bright-colored cloth 
bows. 
 The traditional bachelor party for Chief Albron the previous evening had left the 
assorted Clan Chiefs, Sergeants, and visiting nobles feeling a bit delicate that morning, and 
for some reason Chief Twengor found that vastly amusing. 
 Alaia had more or less taken charge of the young ladies in the bridal party, whose 
activities during the week leading up to the wedding had consisted, so far as Althalus could 
tell, largely of dressmaking and giggling. 
 Chief Gweti and the ancient Chief Delur had journeyed to Albron’s hall for the 
ceremony, since the wedding of a Clan Chief traditionally required the presence of all the 
Chiefs of Arum. Gweti largely kept to himself during the festivities. Andine’s decision not 
to loot the city of Kanthon ha d put the pinch-faced Chief’s nose out of joint, and he 
obviously found scant reason to celebrate. 
 The ceremony was scheduled for noon. Althalus  gathered that this was an ancient Arum 
custom—designed primarily to give the celebrants time to recover from the previous 
evening’s entertainments, and not to interfere too much with the postceremony celebration. 
Arums appeared to take their parties very seriously. 
 There had been a certain amount of religious controversy about the wedding, since the 
God of the Arums was the mountain God Bherghos, while the Plakands worshiped 
Kherdhos, the herd God. 
 “Brother Bheid’s going to perform the ceremony,” Althalus  announced in a tone that 
ended the discussion rather abruptly. 
 And so it was that as noon approached, Bheid, garbed in his black priestly robe, stood at 
the front of Albron’s central hall with Chief Albron, Sergeant Khalor, and Chief Kreuter 
awaiting the entrance of the bride and her attendants, Andine and Leitha. (Eddings, 
Redemption 588−89) 
The passage is only flimsily anchored to Althalus. His name is evoked thrice, and his 
thoughts twice, suggesting that  the narrative information, wh ile not filtered through his 
consciousness, is at least nomin ally restricted to what he is privy to. The passage also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130
showcases the faint, affable reflectorizati on, temporal condensation, and minimal story 
space detail typical of the narrative. 
 Flight of the Nighthawks  (2004), the first volume in Feist’s new Darkwar series, 
employs roughly the same formal arrangement as Magician: Apprentice. For the most 
part, the narration is neutrally toned and reportorial, displaying neither markedly 
authorial nor markedly figural tendencies . Focalization on characters’ thoughts and 
emotions is frequent, although usually superficial, and tends to serve drama and 
exposition rather than serious, empathic fi gurality. Despite the ove rall neutral cast, the 
narrator repeatedly indu lges in authorial ta ctics, namely unhindered focalization-shifts, 
collective focalization, and extensive exposition. Compared to its predecessor, the novel 
incorporates perhaps a touch more figural pers pectivism, yet it also juggles a larger cast 
of characters, resulting in quantitatively less focus on individual minds. The following 
extract encapsulates this approach in mi crocosm form. The extr act depicts Caleb and 
Marie exchange marriage vows as their two sons, Tad and Zane, Caleb’s parents, Pug 
and Miranda, and Caleb’s older brother, Magnus, stand witness: 
Pug and Miranda stood to one side, and watched their youngest son and the woman he 
loved exchange their vows before Father DeM onte, the local Priest of Killian whose tiny 
church served the Stardock region. 
 Magnus stood a few feet behind his parents, studying his younger brother with a 
mixture of pleasure and envy. That Caleb could find a little joy in the dark world they 
inhabited pleased Magnus enormously. 
 Pug was impressed by how much had been done in so short a time. Garlands of blooms 
hung from a lattice of grape-stakes constructed by some local boys under Tad’s direction. 
Zane had organized the food and drink, and the tables around the town square were loaded. 
Once word of the wedding had passed through the town, the local women had pitched in 
with freshly-baked goods and preserves, and by sundown it was – as Caleb had predicted – 
a full-blown festival. 
 Tad and Zane stood on Marie’s side of the square, behind the three women who were 
standing with her. They glanced at Ellie and Grame Hodover who stood watching silently. 
Ellie smiled back at the boys who noted her swelling stomach and silently agreed that fate 
had put them on a better path than they had anticipated. 
 Spending a few minutes with Ellie during the course of the afternoon had restored the 
balance of their lives, and she was once again like their sister. Grame, as always, was a self-
important bore, and neither Tad nor Zane could understand what Ellie saw in him, but as 
she loved him they decided that was a good enough reason to put up with the pompous fool. 
 When the priest had finished and the crowd had cheered, Pug motioned for the boys to 
come over and join them. He whispered something to his wife and she nodded. Miranda 
turned her attention to Marie, and as Pug led the boys off to the side of the crowd, Pug felt a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
131
faint pang. Marie looked older than Miranda. She would grow to be an old woman while 
Pug, Miranda and probably Magnus would remain unchanged. What would become of 
Caleb wasn’t clear. There were aspects to his son’s nature that no one else understood, or 
even suspected, save perhaps Nakor. Pug had realized years ago that it was futile to try and 
keep anything the Isalani found interesting a secret. (Feist, 
Flight 165−67) 
Most of the passage focuses on what select ed characters are thinking and feeling and 
perceiving. However, there is little psychologi cal depth to this, and apart from a couple 
of small touches of collectiv e subjectivity in the fifth pa ragraph, the passage evokes no 
sense of figurality. Here, as elsewhere in the novel, the narration seems to have little 
time to delve deeply into figural consciousne ss. The incessant focus on story and plot 
make solid figural narration a negligible c onsideration. Feist, like the Eddingses, is 
content with producing literally just more of the same. 
4.4. Conclusion 
Beyond the emergence and proliferation of fi gural fantasy narratives, the above outline 
also suggests two further trends that charact erize the genre and its development. First, 
there seem to be no prominent narrator pers onas in modern fantasy. Narrators may be 
authorial, their authorial privileges may be pronounced, an d their language mannered, 
yet the narrators themselves rarely materialize as distinct personas, that is, as maximally 
overt narrators who refer to themselves, or  comment on the act of narration. Even the 
most authorially oriented classics of modern  fantasy tend to steer  clear of prototypical 
authorial narration as defined by Stanzel (see section 1.4. above). Moreover, the narrator 
persona has disappeared almost entirely from today’s authorial fantasy. These narratives 
are authorial because they lack sustained in ternal focalization, because of the neutral 
cast of the narration, or because they employ implicitly authorial techniques such as 
consecutive focalization and overt exposition. However, the authorial narrator still 
lingers in modern fantasy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132
 Second, modern fantasy has become incr easingly character-driven, with round and 
realistically portrayed characters slowly infiltrating the ranks of paper-thin superheroes 
and flat archetypes typical of traditional, more  story-driven fantasy. This is not to say 
that authorial narration as such is intrinsi cally less suited for realistic characterization 
than figural narration, or that figural na rration automatically produces psychologically 
complex characters. However, in the case of modern fantasy literature, there is a clear 
correlation between authorial narration and paper-thin characterization on the one hand, 
and between figural narration a nd realistic characterization on the other. Flat characters 
are no strangers to figural fantasy narratives , of course, but the ge neral correlations are 
there. In addition,  I do not mean to suggest that m odern fantasy literature is no longer 
story-driven. Rather, story and plot, while still tantamount to fantasy narratives, have 
become less absolute and restrictive in their authority. This is particularly apparent in 
Hobb and Martin. 
 It bears repeating that the above outline is merely a rough sketch. It is meant to 
suggest a certain kind of development, not to prove it. Sixteen texts, no matter how 
representative a selection, is hardly sufficient to embody as massive and diverse a genre 
as modern fantasy. The outline also makes the assumption that the first volume in a 
series is formally representative of the se ries as a whole (most modern fantasy novels 
belong to one series or anothe r). While I consider this a solid assumption to make – I 
have yet to come across a heterodiegetic fantasy series that significantly alters its 
overall narrative situation between volumes – the outline does not address it, and it 
therefore remains something to be verified. It is also assumed that authors who have 
moved from authorial narration to figural narration do not look back. Again, I am not 
familiar with a single author who has shifted back to the authorial after discovering the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
133
figural, yet this is certainly a distinct possibility that s hould be looked into. After all, 
authors are not as rigid about such categories as literary scholars. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134
5. CONCLUSION 
5.1. Leiber, Martin, and Modern American Fantasy 
To discuss fictional consciousness and its representation(s) is not to discuss what makes 
modern fantasy a distinct and unique literary form, to be sure. Unlike otherworlds, the 
representation of consciousness is a feature common to all fictional narratives. It too has 
its pioneers and champions, of course, but mo st prose fiction is content with following 
popular conventions. Modern fantasy is no exception. It is therefore understandable why 
scholars have opted to devote their time and energy to other facets of fantasy instead: 
the construction of otherworlds, the liberation of imagination, myth-making for modern 
times and audiences, the fantastic itself, a nd so forth. However, while understandable, 
this is not entirely justifiabl e. The academic study of modern  fantasy literature abounds 
in abstractions and interpretations of what fantasy is all about, and why it matters, and 
this is all fine and well as far as it goes. But what is tr oubling is how little discussion 
there is on how exactly modern fantasy says wh at is says. After all, what fantasy is all 
about, and what it seeks to communicate ar e mediated through narr ative technique and 
language. For example, this thesis shows that  what a fantasy narrative can do with its 
otherworld is fundamentally contingent on where and how the narrator situates the 
narrative perspective. Authorial narrators and reflector char acters clearly focalize their 
worlds in different ways, and with different results. The representation of consciousness 
may seem like a transparent laye r between text and meaning, but to treat it as such is to 
overlook a central aspect of narrative meaning-making. 
 The representation of consciousness is at  the heart of the shift from authorial 
narration toward figural narra tion. To study this shift, and thus fictional consciousness, 
can only further our understanding of modern fantasy as a literary genre. Indeed, we can 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
135
already tentatively link the more complex and immersive characterization emerging in 
much recent heterodiegetic fantasy to internal  focalization in general, and to figurally 
motivated forms of psychonarration and free in direct discourse in particular. This new 
focus on character and consci ousness cannot but also reali gn that which distinguishes 
fantasy: the fantastic. Moreover, by studying  the more formal aspects of narration, 
rather than the traditional thematic and ont ological ones th at help identif y fantasy as 
distinct and unique, we can show that the genre includes much technically sophisticated 
writing. In short, we can promote a new lite rary appreciation of the genre by showing 
that there is more to fantasy than the fant astic. Martin, for example, combines gripping 
storytelling and a subtle handling of fantasti c elements with a deft and precise use of 
such techniques as restricted perspective and empathic FID. 
 As this thesis demonstrates, there is a clear shift in narrative situation between 
Leiber’s The Swords of Lankhmar  and Martin’s A Game of Thrones . The former is an 
authorial narrative that nonetheless incorporates a healthy dose of figural narration. The 
figurality is neither extensive nor strong enough to qualify the novel as authorial-figural, 
yet it does anticipate a new na rrative paradigm. Leiber, after all, was among the first to 
introduce a new kind of figural realism into modern fantasy (see section 1.3. above). 
Martin’s novel, in turn, is a solid figural na rrative. The figural narrative situation is not 
always marked, but it dominates the novel all the same. The historical outline in Chapter 
4 broadly traces this same shift in technique. While the present thesis does not prove the 
shift, it does suggest it in  no uncertain terms: all eighteen modern fantasy narratives 
discussed on the preceding pages are representative wo rks by major authors. My 
audacious assumption remains to be validated, but now the fundamental shift in the way 
figural consciousness and experience are represented in modern American fantasy has at 
least been noted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
136
5.2. Problems and Future Considerations 
The present thesis suffers from a few lim itations, some of which I have already 
commented on. The most obvious one is the conflict between the ambitious scope of the 
thesis and the relatively small number of works discussed in it. My theoretical 
framework has also been trimmed down. Of  the five orientat ional components of 
focalization distinguished by Rimmon-Kena n the foregoing analys is addresses only 
three. Even though this is sufficient for Leib er and Martin, as the two narratives employ 
focalization fairly consistently across the board, there are works that exhibit perspectival 
discrepancies between the five components. Terry Goodkind’s The Sword of Truth  
novels (1994−), for example, are figurally narrated, ye t begin to adopt a didactic cast as 
the series develops: in its ideological orientation, the focalization in the novels begins to 
gravitate toward an external moral perspe ctive that overshadows all others (Randian 
Objectivism mixed with Goodkind’s own bran d of rational-heroic egoism). Brooks’s 
The Scions of Shannara  betrays a similar, albeit lighter , touch of authorial didacticism 
on a figural canvas (see page 123 above). Such works clearly require a different 
treatment in terms of focalization than either Leiber or Martin. 
 Beyond focalization as such, I have also excluded other releva nt or overlapping 
narrative phenomena from the analysis: author ial utterances, narrative preliminaries, 
characters and characterization, description, and so forth. Exposition, for its part, merits 
a much more comprehensive treatment than what  I have been able to afford it here. All 
these phenomena function differently in aut horial and figural narratives, and therefore 
qualify as potentially fruitful areas for analysis. However, it should be noted that a full 
narratological analysis of the inward turn in modern fantasy is almost certainly beyond 
any single study. Moreover, if the aim is simply to prove the inward turn, such a broad 
analysis is also unnecessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
137
 Another potential problem in this thesis is its narrow generic scope: all the fantasy 
narratives discussed here belong to a subgenre of modern fantasy variously dubbed Epic 
Fantasy, Heroic Fantasy , High Fantasy , Quest Fantasy , Sword and Sorcery , and 
Tolkienian Fantasy. This single subgenre hardly represents the breadth and depth of 
modern fantasy writing. Then again, it is by far the largest and most popular subgenre in 
the field, and, as such, embodies its mainstream. Furthermore, as I note in the 
Introduction, the narrative situation and the inward turn are phenomena that I believe 
mostly transcend subgeneric differences in modern fantasy literature. The works 
discussed in this thesis may not comprise  a generically broad selection, but they 
nevertheless provide a generical ly representative one. Still, a broader range of works, 
including experimental and marginal ones, could better help establish the formal borders 
of the genre, and the extent of the inward turn thus far. 
 There are at least two ways in which th e present study can be extended. First, a 
comparative formal analysis of a larger (a nd generically broader) corpus of works is 
required to fully flesh out the shift in narrative technique th at this thesis suggests. The 
corpus should also be expanded to cover A nglo-American fantasy at large, since the 
British and American traditions are inextricab ly interlinked in any case. The structural 
approach taken in this thesis could be maintained: a close analysis of a small selection 
of works combined with a summary analysis  of a much larger one. To my mind, this 
offers the best compromise between in-depth analysis and a representative quantity of 
source texts. Second, the literary and literary historical reasons for the shift need to be 
considered in order to establish a broader context for the inward turn. The key question 
is why did the shift start as la te as it did, given that the conventions of figural narration 
were fully developed more than half a century earlier? What prompted fantasy authors 
to finally embrace figural narrative techniques? This thesis already suggests one answer: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
138
a more realistic conception of character. And what held the authors back? The canonical 
influence of such authorial giants as Tolk ien and Howard surely must have played a 
part. One might also ask if fantastic otherwor lds are inherently better suited to authorial 
presentation. Story world exposition, for exam ple, clearly presents less of a challenge 
for authorial narrators, who possess greater re presentational freedom than the narrators 
of figural narratives. These inquiries can be further extended by discussing the effects of 
the shift on modern fantasy and its possible future developments within the genre. 
 For now, however, we have the first study of the inward turn in modern fantasy 
literature, which, despite its limitations, makes a strong case  for a narrative paradigm 
shift on a broader generic scale. Further studies can, I believe, only add to this. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
139
REFERENCES 
PRIMARY MATERIAL 
Brooks, Terry. The Scions of Shannara. New York: Del Rey Books, 1993. 
---. The Sword of Shannara . The Sword of Shannara Trilogy . London: Orbit, 2004. 
1−431. 
Donaldson, Stephen. Lord Foul’ s Bane. The Chronicles of Thomas Covenant, the 
Unbeliever. London: V oyager, 1996. 13−377. 
Drake, David. Lord of the Isles. New York: Tor, 1997. 
Eddings, David. Pawn of Prophecy. New York: Del Rey Books, 1990. 
Eddings, David, and Leigh Eddings. The Redemption of Althalus . New York: Del Rey 
Books, 2001. 
Feist, Raymond E. Flight of the Nighthawks. London: V oyager, 2004. 
---. Magician: Apprentice. The Author’s Preferred Edition. New York: Bantam Books, 
1994. 
Hobb, Robin. Ship of Magic. New York: Bantam Books, 1998. 
Howard, Robert E. “Queen of the Black Coast.” The Coming of Conan The Cimmerian . 
New York: Del Rey Books, 2003. 119−149. 
Jordan, Robert. The Eye of the World. London: Orbit, 1998. 
Joyce, James. Ulysses. Ed. Danis Rose. London: Picador, 1997. 
Kay, Guy Gavriel. The Summer Tree. New York: Roc Books, 1992. 
Le Guin, Ursula. A Wizard of Earthsea. The Earthsea Quartet. London: Penguin Books, 
1993. 9−168. 
Leiber, Fritz. “Author’s Note.” The Second Book of Lankhmar. London: Gollancz, 2001. 
3. 
---. The Swords of Lankhmar. The Second Book of Lankhmar . London: Gollancz, 2001. 
5−229. 
Martin, George R. R. A Game of Thrones. New York: Bantam Books, 1997. 
Peake, Mervyn. Titus Groan. The Gormenghast Trilogy. London: Vintage, 1999. 1−367. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. The Fellowship of the Ring. London: HarperCollins, 1999. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
140
Williams, Tad. The Dragonbone Chair. New York: DAW Books, 2005. 
SECONDARY MATERIAL 
Bal, Mieke. Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative . 2 nd ed. Toronto, 
Buffalo and London: University of Toronto Press, 2002. 
Cohn, Dorrit. Transparent Minds: Narrative Modes for Presenting C onsciousness in 
Fiction. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983. 
de Jong, Irene J. F. “The Origins of Figural Narration in Antiquity.” New Perspectives 
on Narrative Perspective. Ed. Willie van Peer and Seymour Chatman. New York: 
State University of New York Press, 2001. 67−81. 
Eilers, Michelle L. “On the Origins of Modern Fantasy.” Extrapolation 41 (2000): 
317−337. 
Fantasy = The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Ed. John Clute and John Grant. London: Orbit, 
1997. 
Fludernik, Monika. The Fictions of Language and the Languages of Fiction: The 
linguistic representation of  speech and consciousness . London and New York: 
Routledge, 1993. 
---. Towards a ‘Natural’ Narratology. London and New York: Routledge, 2002. 
Jahn, Manfred. “Narratology: A Guide to the Theory of Narrative.” Poems, Plays, and 
Prose: A Guide to the Theory of Literary Genres . 28 May 2005. English 
Department, University of Col ogne. 19 November 2006. <http://www.uni-
koeln.de/~ame02/pppn.htm>. 
Jakubowski, Maxim. “Modern Fantasy for Adults, 1957 −88.” Fantasy Literature: A 
Reader’ s Guide. Ed. Neil Barron. London and New York: Garland, 1990. 
223−304. 
Manlove, C. N. “On the Nature of Fantasy.” The Aesthetics of Fantasy Literature and 
Art. Ed. Roger C. Schlobin. Notre Dame: Un iversity of Notre Dame Press, 1982. 
16−35. 
Onega, Susana, and José Angel García Landa. “Introduction.” Narratology: An 
Introduction. Ed. Susana Onega and José Angel García Landa. London and New 
York: Longman, 1999. 1−41. 
Palmer, Alan. “The Construction of Fictional Minds.” Narrative 10 (2002): 28−46. 
Phelan, James. “Why Narrators Can Be Focalizers—and Why It Matters.” New 
Perspectives on Narrative Perspective . Ed. Willie van Peer and Seymour 
Chatman. New York: State University of New York Press, 2001. 51−64. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
141
Rabkin, Eric S. The Fantastic in Literature . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1976. 
Rimmon-Kenan, Shlomith. Narrative Fiction: Contemporary Poetics . 2 nd ed. London 
and New York: Routledge, 2003. 
Science = The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . Ed. John Clute and Peter Nicholls. 
London: Orbit, 1993. 
Smith, Dinitia. “A Fantasy Realm Too Vile For Hobbits.” The New York Times 12 Dec. 
2005: E1, E8. 
Stableford, Brian. “Fritz Leiber.” Supernatural Fiction Writers: Fantasy and Horror II . 
Ed. E. F. Bleiler. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1985. 933−939. 
---. “From Baum to Tolkien, 1900−56.” Fantasy Literature: A Reader’ s Guide. Ed. Neil 
Barron. London and New York: Garland, 1990. 116−222. 
Stanzel, F. K. A Theory of Narrative. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
Swinfen, Ann. In Defence of Fantasy: A Study of the Genre in English and American 
Literature since 1945. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1984. 
The Locus Index to Science Fiction Awards . Ed. Mark R. Kelly. 21 January 2006. 19 
November 2006. <http://www.locusmag.com/SFAwards/>. 
Tolkien, J. R. R. “On Fairy-Stories.” Tree and Leaf . London: Unwin Hyman, 1988. 
9−73. 
Tymn, Marshall B., et al. Fantasy Literature: A Core Collection and Reference Guide . 
New York: R. R. Bowker Company, 1979. 
Wolfe, Gary K. Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy: A Glossary and Guide 
to Scholarship. New York: Greenwood Press, 1986. 
---. “The Encounter with Fantasy.” The Aesthetics of Fantasy Literature and Art . Ed. 
Roger C. Schlobin. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1982. 1−15. 
Zanger, Jules. “Heroic Fantasy and Social Reality: ex nihilo nihil fit .” The Aesthetics of 
Fantasy Literature and Art . Ed. Roger C. Schlobin. Notre Dame: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 1982. 226−236. 
 
 