
Fool’s Assassin by Robin Hobb, review: 'high art' - Telegraph
 We no longer check to see whether Telegraph.co.uk displays properly in Internet Explorer version 6 or earlier.
 To see our content at its best we recommend upgrading if you wish to continue using IE or using another browser such as Firefox, Safari or Google Chrome.
 Accessibility links
 Skip to article
 Skip to navigation
 Telegraph.co.uk
 Thursday 24 September 2015
 Home
 Video
 News
 World
 Sport
 Finance
 Comment
 Culture
 Travel
 Life
 Women
 Fashion
 Luxury
 Tech
 Cars
 Film
 TV
 Film
 TV and Radio
 Books
 Music
 Comedy
 Art
 Theatre
 Photography
 Dance
 Opera
 Hay Festival
 Glyndebourne
 Best Books To Read
 Book Reviews
 Fiction
 Non-Fiction
 Children's Books
 Book Shop
 Ways With Words
 Books Video
 Advertisement
 Home»
 Culture»
 Books»
 Book Reviews
 Fool’s Assassin by Robin Hobb, review: 'high art'
Robin Hobb’s powerful novels transcend the fantasy genre
 5
 Fantasy fulfilled: Robin Hobb’s work features royal warriors and deadly assassins 
 tag -->
 By 
 Jane Shilling
 4:00PM BST 23 Aug 2014
 Comments
 In a pleasant rural manor house, at an unspecified moment in the distant past of a different world, a middle-aged man and his wife are enjoying a hard-earned retirement. The anguished turbulence of their youth is over, resolved into quiet contentment. Yet the past has a trick of leaching into the present. So it is that FitzChivalry Farseer, hero of Robin Hobb’s Farseer and Tawny Man trilogies, makes his return after an absence of almost a decade. 
 Hobb’s imaginary realm of the Six Duchies, constructed over the past 19 years, has made her a star of fantasy fiction. Within her meticulously realised world, states skirmish, aristocratic intrigues fester, and farmers are threatened by raiders from across the seas. The most sophisticated technology is magic, of which there is a potent range. 
 Since the Tawny Man trilogy ended in 2003 with Fool’s Fate, Hobb’s readers have hoped she would return to the story of FitzChivalry, the royal bastard and trained assassin, and his elusive soulmate and nemesis, the Fool. It seemed unthinkable that she had written the last word on their friendship, but the signs were not encouraging. Fitz’s final words in Fool’s Fate, “I am content”, sounded conclusive. 
 VISIT: Our complete guide to the best books to read, from novels to histories and memoirs 
 Yet a teasing hint preceded them: “Sometimes a gap can be seen like a promise.” After a gap of 11 years, the promise is fulfilled. 
 Related Articles
 Terry Pratchett: a fantasy writer facing reality
 27 Aug 2015
 Joanna Trollope: children need classics not fantasy
 06 Oct 2013
 In the opening pages of Fool’s Assassin, the first volume of the Fitz and the Fool trilogy, Fitz, now 47, is preparing to celebrate Winterfest with his wife, Molly, when a messenger arrives at their rural retreat of Withywoods. In Fitz's old occupation, the arrival of a messenger was invariably the preamble to a testing adventure. But either he has lost his edge, or he prefers not to recall the past, for he ignores his visitor, who vanishes, leaving nothing but a sense of disquiet. 
 The vanished messenger had something of momentous importance to impart, but it takes Fitz almost the entire book to realise it. In the headlong final pages, when the slowness of the opening chapters comes together, the reader realises with a mixture of exhilaration and dread that the adventure is just beginning. 
 Robin Hobb is acknowledged – not least by her colleague, George RR Martin – as one of the pre-eminent writers of modern fantasy fiction. The accolade is richly deserved, but also strangely diminishing for a novelist whose writing is too powerful to be contained within the narrow definition of genre. 
 Hobb is always readable. But the elegant translucence of her prose is deceptive. What interests her is not fine writing per se, but writing that offers the least resistance between reader and story. Groping for comparisons, you find yourself in the company of the great compendious literary novelists. As the best writers do, Hobb shows us ourselves in her characters. Their longings and failings are our own, and we find our view of the world indelibly changed by their experiences. That is the ambition of high art. The novelists in any genre are rare who achieve it with Hobb’s combination of accessibility and moral authority. 
 Fool’s Assassin by Robin Hobb 
 HarperVoyager, 640pp, Telegraph offer price: £18 + £1.95 p&p (RRP £20) . Call 0844 871 1515 or see books.telegraph.co.uk 
 READ: Best books of 2014 
 Book Reviews
 Culture »
 Books »
 Book news »
 Fiction Reviews »
 Culture Reviews »
 Telegraph Book Shop
 Related Partners
 Love puzzles? Get the best at Telegraph Puzzles
 Books on Amazon.co.uk
 In Book Reviews
 The 100 novels everyone should read
 The 85 best books of 2014
 The 19 best history and war books of 2014
 10 great meals in literature
 Dickens's London: in pictures
 -->
 More books news
 Top 10 worst sex scenes in modern literature
As Julian Barnes condemns the commercial pressure on authors to include sex 
 scenes in their work, we look at ten recent winners of the Literary Review 
 Bad Sex in Fiction Awards (warning: not for the faint-hearted) 
 Comments
 US Presidents: 30 great one-liners
 Books 
As the candidates running for the 2016 presidency start appearing, we look at 
 the great quotes from White House incumbents 
 30 great quotes about Ireland
 Culture Picture Galleries 
Ireland is a small country but it has played a big role in the history of 
 modern culture
 Comments
 40 great quotes about marriage
 Culture 
Martin Chilton looks at quotes about matrimony from Socrates to Sinatra 
 Booker Prize winners in pictures
 Booker Prize 
All the recipients of the Booker Prize since it began in 1969 
 Comments
 15 times JK Rowling shocked Harry Potter fans
 Harry Potter 
As JK Rowling reveals we're pronoucing Voldemort wrong, we look at the 
 revelations that have emerged since the last book was published 
 Comments
 Author PD James amassed £22 million fortune before she died
Probate records reveal that PD James who became Baroness James of Holland Park 
 had a shrewd eye for property investment 
 The true story (behind the story) that inspired 45 Years
David Constantine, author of the short story that inspired must-see movie, 45 
 Years, tells Joe Shute how a startling real-life event sparked his original 
 tale 
 Comments
 Terry Pratchett: 50 best quotes
 Books 
The wit and wisdom of the late and great Terry Pratchett
 Terry Pratchett: his 10 best Discworld characters
 Books 
Pratchett, whose last novel is published today, wrote 41 Discworld novels in 
 little over 30 years. Here are his 10 best characters, from Granny 
 Weatherwax to Moist von Lipwig 
 Comments
 Advertisement
How we moderate
 telegraphuk
 blog comments powered by Disqus
Advertisement
 Culture Galleries
 100 funny jokes by 100 comedians
 The best British political insults
 Sacha Baron Cohen: 30 best lines
 The Simpsons: 40 best quotations
 30 great one-liners
 A history of the world in funny puns
 Like Telegraph Books on Facebook
 Culture Video»
 Listen: The Fratellis: Eyes Wide, Tongue Tied - album stream
 Glyndebourne presents: Poliuto
 Kwabs: exclusive acoustic performance
 Lianne La Havas: Blood – album commentary part two
 Ward Thomas: Guest List – exclusive stream
 'Everything seemed to have a lot more clarity'
 More from the web
Advertisement
 Advertisement
 More from the web 
 Most Viewed
 1
 Doctor Foster: 'tests plausibility'
 2
 Ian's not looking so cool now
 3
 The real-life exorcist behind Midwinter of the Spirit
 4
 The Muppets: 'a travesty' 
 5
 100 greatest songs of all time
 Telegraph Books»
 Robert Weintraub's No Better Friend
One Man, One Dog, and Their Incredible Story of Courage and Survival in World 
 War II
 Winston Churchill at the Telegraph
A collection of the best contributions and reports from the Telegraph 
 focussing on the key events, decisions and moments in Churchill's life 
 Sinclair McKay's The Secret Life Of Fighter Command
This book tells the story of the men and women of Fighter Command who worked 
 tirelessly in air bases scattered throughout Britain to thwart the Nazis 
 Pet Tales : Extraordinary Pets from Ordinary Homes
The essential gift book for any pet lover - real-life tales of devoted dogs, 
 rebellious cats and other unforgettable four-legged friends
 The Birds of America
A complete edition of John James Audubon's world famous The Birds of America, 
 bound in linen and beautifully presented in a special slipcase
 More from the web
 Barnebys
 New transparency in the art market
 View
 Sky Box Sets
 Get up to date with the best on TV
 View
 Diesel Performance 
 A 360° virtual drive with Ben Collins
 View
 Extraordinary Road Tales 
 'A vintage shopping spree led to a bizarre roadside tale'
 View
Back to top
 HOME
 Film
 Film Reviews
 Film News
 Books
 Book Reviews
 Book Shop
 Music
 Music Reviews
 Classical Music
 Music Video
 Music Festivals
 Opera
 Tickets
 TV and Radio
 TV Guide
 Theatre
 Theatre Reviews
 Art
 Dance
 Dating
 Culture News
 Picture Galleries
 Culture Video
 Culture Critics
 Photography
 Crossword
 Theatre Tickets
 Contact us
 Privacy and Cookies
 Advertising
 Fantasy Football
 Announcements
 Reader Prints
 Follow Us
 Apps
 Epaper
 Expat
 Promotions
 Subscriber
 Syndication
 © Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2015
 Terms and Conditions 
 Today's News
 Archive
 Style Book
 Weather Forecast
