 Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel (Chapter 11) - Medievalism in English Canadian Literature Skip to main content Accessibility help Login Alert Cancel Log in × × Temporary Disruption We have implemented additional assurance measures to protect our systems. As a result, we have suspended some of our systems and services. We apologise for any temporary disruption some customers may experience. Discover Content Products and Services Register Log In Logo for Cambridge Core from Cambridge University Press. Click to return to homepage. Search Logo for Cambridge Core from Cambridge University Press. Click to return to homepage. Browse Services Open research Institution Login Search Menu links Browse Subjects Subjects (A-D) Anthropology Archaeology Area Studies Art Chemistry Classical Studies Computer Science Drama, Theatre, Performance Studies Subjects (E-K) Earth and Environmental Science Economics Education Engineering English Language Teaching – Resources for Teachers Film, Media, Mass Communication General Science Geography History Subjects (L-O) Language and Linguistics Law Life Sciences Literature Management Materials Science Mathematics Medicine Music Nutrition Subjects (P-Z) Philosophy Physics and Astronomy Politics and International Relations Psychiatry Psychology Religion Social Science Research Methods Sociology Statistics and Probability Open access All open access publishing Open access Open access journals Research open journals Journals containing open access Open access articles Open access books Open access Elements Journals Explore All journal subjects Search journals Open access Open access journals Research open journals Journals containing open access Open access articles Collections Cambridge Forum Cambridge Law Reports Collection Cambridge Prisms Research Directions Books Explore Books Open access books New books Flip it Open Collections Cambridge Companions Cambridge Editions Cambridge Histories Cambridge Library Collection Cambridge Shakespeare Cambridge Handbooks Collections (cont.) Dispute Settlement Reports Online Flip it Open Hemingway Letters Shakespeare Survey Stahl Online The Correspondence of Isaac Newton Elements Explore About Elements Elements series Open access Elements New Elements Subjects (A-E) Anthropology Archaeology Classical Studies Computer Science Drama, Theatre, Performance Studies Earth and Environmental Sciences Economics Education Engineering Subjects (F-O) Film, Media, Mass Communication History Language and Linguistics Law Life Sciences Literature Management Mathematics Medicine Music Subjects (P-Z) Philosophy Physics and Astronomy Politics and International Relations Psychology Religion Sociology Statistics and Probability Textbooks Explore Cambridge Higher Education Title list New titles Collections Book collections Cambridge Companions Cambridge Editions Cambridge Histories Cambridge Library Collection Cambridge Shakespeare Cambridge Handbooks Book collections (cont.) Dispute Settlement Reports Online Flip it Open Hemingway Letters Shakespeare Survey Stahl Online The Correspondence of Isaac Newton Journal collections Cambridge Forum Cambridge Law Reports Collection Cambridge Materials Cambridge Prisms Series All series Partners Partners Agenda Publishing Anthem Press ARC Humanities Press Boydell & Brewer Bristol University Press Central European University Press Edinburgh University Press Emirates Center for Strategic Studies and Research Facet Publishing Foundation Books Partners (cont.) Gerlach Press Intersentia ISEAS-Yusof Ishak Institute Jagiellonian University Press Manchester University Press Multilingual Matters Oxbow Books Royal Economic Society The University of Adelaide Press Unisa Press Partners (cont.) Wits University Press Services About About Cambridge Core About Accessibility statement CrossMark policy Ethical Standards Environment and sustainability Environment and sustainability Reducing print Journals moving to online only Guides User guides User Guides and Videos Support Videos Training Help Cambridge Core help Contact us Technical support Agents Services for agents Services for agents Journals for agents Books for agents Price list Authors Journals Journal authors Journal publishing statistics Corresponding author Seeking permission to use copyrighted material Publishing supplementary material Preparing accessible materials Journal production - FAQs Journals (cont.) Author affiliations Co-reviewing policy Anonymising your manuscript Publishing open access Convert your article to Gold Open Access Publishing Open Access - webinars Journals (cont.) Preparing and submitting your paper Journals publication journey Publishing agreement FAQs for journal authors Author Information Form FAQs Promoting your published paper Measuring impact Journals artwork guide Using ORCID Books Books Publishing your book open access Marketing your book Author guides for Cambridge Elements Corporates Corporates Commercial reprints Advertising Sponsorship Book special sales Contact us Editors Information Journal development Peer review for editors Open access for editors Policies and guidelines Resources The editor's role Open research for editors Engagement and promotion for editors Librarians Information Open Access for Librarians Transformative agreements Transformative Agreements - FAQs Evidence based acquisition Cambridge libraries of the world podcast Purchasing models Journals Publishing Updates Products Cambridge frontlist Cambridge journals digital archive Hot topics Other digital products Perpetual access products Price list Developing country programme New content Tools Eligibility checker Transformative agreements KBART MARC records Using MARCEdit for MARC records Inbound OpenURL specifications COUNTER usage reporting Resources Catalogues and resources Making the most of your EBA Posters Leaflets and brochures Additional resources Find my sales contact Training Read and publish resources Peer review Peer review How to peer review journal articles How to peer review book proposals How to peer review Registered Reports Peer review FAQs Ethics in peer review Online peer review systems A guide to Publons Publishing ethics Journals Publishing ethics guidelines for journals Core editorial policies for journals Authorship and contributorship for journals Affiliations for journals Research ethics for journals Competing interests and funding for journals Journals (cont.) Data and supporting evidence for journals Misconduct for journals Corrections, retractions and removals for journals Versions and adaptations for journals Libel, defamation and freedom of expression Business ethics journals Books Publishing ethics guidelines for books Core editorial policies for books Authorship and contributorship for books Affiliations for books Research ethics for books Competing interests and funding for books Books (cont.) Data and supporting evidence for books Misconduct for books Corrections, retractions and removals for books Versions and adaptations for books Libel, defamation and freedom of expression Business ethics books Publishing partners Publishing partners Publishing partnerships Book publishing partners eBook publishing partnerships Journal publishing partnerships Publishing partners (cont.) Journals publishing Customer support Membership Services Our Team Open research Open access policies Open access policies Open research Open access policies Cambridge University Press and Plan S Text and data mining Preprint policy Social sharing Journals Open access journals Gold Open Access journals Transformative journals Green Open Access policy for journals Transparent pricing policy for journals Books and Elements Open access books Gold open access books Green Open Access policy for books Open access Elements Open access publishing About open access Open research Open Access Week What is open access? Open access glossary Open access myths Hybrid Open Access FAQs Eligibility checker Open access resources Open access resources Benefits of open access Creative commons licences Funder policies and mandates Article type definitions Convert your article to Gold Open Access Open research initiatives Research transparency Transparency and openness Open Practice Badges OA organisations, initiatives & directories Registered Reports Annotation for Transparent Inquiry (ATI) Journal flips Open access journal flips OA Journal Flip FAQs Flip it Open Flip it Open Flip it Open FAQs Open access funding Open access funding Funding open access publication Cambridge Open Equity Initiative Completing a RightsLink (open access) transaction Cambridge Open Engage Cambridge Open Engage Cambridge Open Engage Partner With Us Branded Hubs Event Workspaces Partner Resources APSA Preprints APSA Preprints FAQs Hostname: page-component-5d84bcc8dc-vpzxz Total loading time: 0 Render date: 2026-09-06T19:33:04.632Z Has data issue: false hasContentIssue false Home > Books > Medievalism in English Canadian Literature > Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel Medievalism in English Canadian Literature From Richardson to Atwood Read book online Book contents Frontmatter Contents Introduction: English Canadian Medievalism 1 “Men of the North”: Archibald Lampman's Use of Incidents in the Lives of Medieval Monarchs and Aristocrats 2 “Going Back to the Middle Ages”: Tracing Medievalism in Julia Beckwith Hart's St. Ursula's Convent and John Richardson's Wacousta 3 John Richardson's Wacousta and the Transfer of Medievalist Romance 4 A Canadian Caliban in King Arthur's Court: Materialist Medievalism and Northern Gothic in William Wilfred Campbell's Mordred 5 Orientalist Medievalism in Early Canadian Periodicals 6 The Collegiate Gothic: Legitimacy and Inheritance in Robertson Davies's The Rebel Angels 7 Earle Birney as Public Poet: a Canadian Chaucer? 8 “That's what you get for being food”: Margaret Atwood's Symbolic Cannibalism 129 9 Lost in Allegory: Grief and Chivalry in Kit Pearson's A Perfect, Gentle Knight 10 Remembering the Romance: Medievalist Romance in Fantasy Fiction by Guy Gavriel Kay and Charles de Lint 11 Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel 12 The Medieval Methods of Patrick DeWitt: Undermajordomo Minor Index Miscellaneous Endmatter 11 - Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel Published online by Cambridge University Press: 25 March 2020 By Ewa Drab Edited by M. J. Toswell and Anna Czarnowus Chapter Accessibility Book contents Frontmatter Contents Introduction: English Canadian Medievalism 1 “Men of the North”: Archibald Lampman's Use of Incidents in the Lives of Medieval Monarchs and Aristocrats 2 “Going Back to the Middle Ages”: Tracing Medievalism in Julia Beckwith Hart's St. Ursula's Convent and John Richardson's Wacousta 3 John Richardson's Wacousta and the Transfer of Medievalist Romance 4 A Canadian Caliban in King Arthur's Court: Materialist Medievalism and Northern Gothic in William Wilfred Campbell's Mordred 5 Orientalist Medievalism in Early Canadian Periodicals 6 The Collegiate Gothic: Legitimacy and Inheritance in Robertson Davies's The Rebel Angels 7 Earle Birney as Public Poet: a Canadian Chaucer? 8 “That's what you get for being food”: Margaret Atwood's Symbolic Cannibalism 129 9 Lost in Allegory: Grief and Chivalry in Kit Pearson's A Perfect, Gentle Knight 10 Remembering the Romance: Medievalist Romance in Fantasy Fiction by Guy Gavriel Kay and Charles de Lint 11 Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel 12 The Medieval Methods of Patrick DeWitt: Undermajordomo Minor Index Miscellaneous Endmatter Get access Share Cite Summary THE CHARACTER OF fantasy literature has changed to a great extent since the nineteenth-century publication of those pioneering stories now considered fantasy, such as George MacDonald's Phantastes: A Faerie Romance for Men and Women (1858) or William Morris's The Well at the World's End (1896), the latter creating for the first time an independent fantasy world. Nonetheless, despite all the transformations to which fantasy fiction has been subjected, it retains a profound connection with a medievalist aesthetics. Fantasy literature, indebted to recurring themes and traditions of the Middle Ages, has developed on the structural foundation of medieval myths and legends, chansons de geste , and chivalric romances. By consequence, elements such as chivalric exploits or magical phenomena are frequent in the genre. Any attempt to reveal the sources of magical stories points to “the ancient traditions of tales of marvels and wonders,” which “continued in the Middle Ages in the form of the romance.” Moreover, magic, widely associated with fantasy, was profusely employed by their authors to accompany medieval narratives, possibly “in order to encourage their audiences toward a multi-level interpretative engagement with the text.” With Arthurian romances and legends constantly influencing the genre, for example in such contemporary mutations as Marion Zimmer Bradley's Avalon series, medieval modes continue to constitute a rich source of inspiration and of useful devices applied in fantasy texts, especially in the context of the Gothic, which “ushered in the nineteenth-century cult of the medieval.” Reminiscences of the Middle Ages were constantly present in the later periods, thus strengthening the importance of its imagery in subsequent literatures, including fantasy. This tendency to perpetuate a medieval aesthetics in fiction perhaps diminished over time, and ultimately, “medievalism found refuge in fantasy literature.” A significant number of fantasy stories focus on technologically underdeveloped locations inhabited by heroes who perform glorious deeds and are involved in sword-fights and magic, which readers associate with uncomplicated images of the medieval period. Therefore, because general knowledge of the media tempora is strictly limited to these simplified, if not false, concepts, the representation of this part of history and its presence in the genre tends on the whole to be trivialized. Information Type Chapter Information Medievalism in English Canadian Literature From Richardson to Atwood , pp. 172 - 188 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787448858.012 [Opens in a new window] Publisher: Boydell & Brewer Print publication year: 2020 Access options Get access to the full version of this content by using one of the access options below. (Log in options will check for institutional or personal access. Content may require purchase if you do not have access.) Accessibility standard: Unknown Why this information is here This section outlines the accessibility features of this content - including support for screen readers, full keyboard navigation and high-contrast display options. This may not be relevant for you. Accessibility Information Accessibility compliance for the PDF of this chapter is currently unknown and may be updated in the future. Cited by Loading... Save book to Kindle To save this book to your Kindle, first ensure no-reply@cambridge.org is added to your Approved Personal Document E-mail List under your Personal Document Settings on the Manage Your Content and Devices page of your Amazon account. Then enter the ‘name’ part of your Kindle email address below. Find out more about saving to your Kindle . Note you can select to save to either the @free.kindle.com or @kindle.com variations. ‘@free.kindle.com’ emails are free but can only be saved to your device when it is connected to wi-fi. ‘@kindle.com’ emails can be delivered even when you are not connected to wi-fi, but note that service fees apply. Find out more about the Kindle Personal Document Service . Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel By Ewa Drab Edited by M. J. Toswell , Anna Czarnowus Book: Medievalism in English Canadian Literature Online publication: 25 March 2020 Chapter DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787448858.012 Your Kindle email address Please provide your Kindle email. @free.kindle.com @kindle.com ( service fees apply ) Available formats PDF Please select a format to save. By using this service, you agree that you will only keep content for personal use, and will not openly distribute them via Dropbox, Google Drive or other file sharing services Please confirm that you accept the terms of use. Cancel Save × Save book to Dropbox To save content items to your account, please confirm that you agree to abide by our usage policies. If this is the first time you use this feature, you will be asked to authorise Cambridge Core to connect with your account. Find out more about saving content to Dropbox . Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel By Ewa Drab Edited by M. J. Toswell , Anna Czarnowus Book: Medievalism in English Canadian Literature Online publication: 25 March 2020 Chapter DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787448858.012 Available formats PDF Please select a format to save. By using this service, you agree that you will only keep content for personal use, and will not openly distribute them via Dropbox, Google Drive or other file sharing services Please confirm that you accept the terms of use. Cancel Save × Save book to Google Drive To save content items to your account, please confirm that you agree to abide by our usage policies. If this is the first time you use this feature, you will be asked to authorise Cambridge Core to connect with your account. Find out more about saving content to Google Drive . Medievalisms and Romance Traditions in Guy Gavriel Kay's Ysabel By Ewa Drab Edited by M. J. Toswell , Anna Czarnowus Book: Medievalism in English Canadian Literature Online publication: 25 March 2020 Chapter DOI: https://doi.org/10.1017/9781787448858.012 Available formats PDF Please select a format to save. By using this service, you agree that you will only keep content for personal use, and will not openly distribute them via Dropbox, Google Drive or other file sharing services Please confirm that you accept the terms of use. Cancel Save × Our Site Accessibility Contact & Help Legal Notices Cookie Settings Cancel your order Quick Links Cambridge Core Cambridge Open Engage Cambridge Aspire website Our Products Journals Books Elements Textbooks Courseware Join us online Location Please choose a valid location. Update Legal Information Rights & Permissions Copyright Privacy Notice Terms of Use Cookies Policy Cambridge University Press 2026 Cancel Confirm × 