
Article written by 
Joshua Ehiosun
C2 certified writer.
With tales of mighty conquerors who ruled the skies, seas, and land with the might of 
dragons
, 
‘
Fire and Blood
‘ 
remains one of the best historical fantasy books ever written. It uses a third-person perspective with unreliable narrators to tell the stories of the many Kings who sat on the 
Iron Throne
, the famed seat of power in Westeros. Many years after its release, it continues to lead the path guiding upcoming storytellers in narrating without choosing sides. The novel also portrays the brutalities of life and war and shows how varying human interactions can make or break societies.
‘Fire and Blood’
 portrays the gradual change in the Western continent starting from Aegon’s Conquest and takes the reader through 150 years of events. With a remarkable story, the novel gives the perspective of how complex politics is in the World of Ice and Fire.
Fire and Blood 
Story
Though many people may argue that 
‘Fire and Blood’ 
does not match the novels of 
A Song of Ice and Fire
 in storytelling, they may fail to realize the remarkability of its narration. The novel is not just a fantasy book that tells the story of flying 
dragons
 breathing fire. It intricately portrays the working principles of the members of 
House Targaryen
 from the perspective of 
others
 who stayed around them. The narrators of the events were not impartial in their storytelling as they had their favorites who they told more pleasing stories about.
Other sources used in the information gathering of the histories of Westeros and the Targaryen dynasty included songs and folklore; this made ‘Fire and Blood’ seem more like an epic rebranding of history than an actual historical novel. The book also shows flaws in its flow of events as its principal writer, Archmaester Gylndale, struggled to accept the account of events narrated by his sources. Sometimes, Gylndale placed two opposing stories side by side, like that of King Jaehaerys and Alyssane Targaryen. 
According to some sources, the King took his sister to 
Dragonstone
 after learning of her planned wedding to Ser Orryn Baratheon. While on the island, Lord Rogar Baratheon arrived, and an epic standoff occurred between 
the Hand of the King
 and the Kingsguard. Other sources stated the encounter was not as incredible as narrated; this leaves the reader to choose between what version of events they want, though in most cases, they go for the most epic one.
Another distinct spin on 
‘Fire and Blood’s’
 story
 is it gives the reader a choice to take what version of an event they want. Though it knows most people will accept stories of flying 
dragons
 over those of courtly processions, the book still indulges in telling a bland and captivating version of the same event. 
Characters 
Like A Song of Ice and Fire, 
‘Fire and Blood’ 
introduces 
intricately designed characters
. Each person in the novel has distinct goals and principles, and they interact with their world naturally. George R. R. Martin’s expertise in creating deep characters resonated in his epic tale of the Targaryens, as each of them, from Aegon the Conqueror to Princess Rhaenyra Targaryen, had a different spin on their personality. 
The book also dives into the workings of people’s minds, portraying how nuanced people’s actions may be. It also shows how an unforgiving world of constant sadness and betrayal changes even the kindest hearts, turning them into vile beings. One crucial human emotion the characters perfectly portray is hatred. The Dance of the 
Dragons
 was a civil war that led to the destruction of almost all the living 
dragons
. Though it started with Aegon II becoming King, the conflict only took full effect after Prince Aemond Targaryen let hate take over his decisions.
Other people explored in the book include the Starks and Lannisters.
Though they may not be human characters, the 
dragons
 in 
‘Fire and Blood’
 were essential to the events from Aegon I to Aegon III’s time. From the great Balerion, the Black Dread, to the spiteful Sheestealer, the 
dragons
 were crucial to the generations of Targaryens who rode them, and their existence tipped the scales of power in one direction. However, by the end of the book, the once-mighty house from the Valyrian Empire became a shadow of itself as most of its beasts were dead from war.
Dialogues
Unlike 
‘A Game of Thrones,’ 
or
 ‘A Storm of Swords,’ ‘Fire and Blood’
 has an inferior dialogue. Most storylines in the novel employ conversations only when a massive event occurs; this could sometimes make the reader lose track of what is going on, as they may struggle to keep track of who is who and what is what. The novel’s writing style also contributes to the choppiness in dialoguing, and though the events occurring are interesting, it could sometimes feel like a chore.
Writing Style and Conclusion
Though it may feel like a chore at some points, 
‘Fire and Blood’
 remains one of 
George R. R. Martin’s finest works
. His intentional blend of historical fiction elements with fantasy made his epic novels on the Targaryen even more captivating. The characters’ intricate design and susceptibility to hatred, lust, anger, and jealousy make the tale even more epic because it shows how far humans are willing to go in their fight for power and control.
The novel’s conclusion is solid, though it is part of a planned duo. Its ending felt like the closure to a very dark and rich history of Westeros and the great houses of the Seven Kingdoms. The novel’s end makes readers understand that no one wins in conflict.
 Fire and Blood Review: The Reign of Dragons and Fire
Book Title:
 Fire and Blood
Book Description:
 'Fire and Blood' is a novel that tells the history of the rise of House Targaryen from the arrival of Aegon I Targaryen to the ascension of Aegon III Targaryen.
Book Author:
 George R. R. Martin
Book Edition:
 First Edition
Book Format:
 Paperback
Publisher - Organization:
 Bantam Books
Date published:
 November 20, 2018
Illustrator:
 Doug Wheatley
ISBN:
 978-1-524-79628-0
Number Of Pages:
 736
Story
Characters
Setting
Dialogues
Conclusion
Lasting Effect on Reader
4.3
Fire and Blood Review
‘Fire and Blood’ follows the political struggle among members of House Targaryen and shows how their meteoric rise to power led to the creation of a united Westeros under one King.
Pros
The Book has exceptional legendary stories. There are dragons and incredible fights. The book is intricately detailed.  
Cons
The book can be tedious to read. It is hard to keep track of the characters and events occurring.  
Join Book Analysis for Free! 
Exclusive to Members
Get access now
Save Your Favorites
Less Ads
Free Newsletter
Comment with Literary Experts
Share
 alert("URL Copied"));'>
Copy
Twitter
Facebook
Pinterest
WhatsApp
About 
Joshua Ehiosun
C2 certified writer.
Joshua is an undying lover of literary works. With a keen sense of humor and passion for coining vague ideas into state-of-the-art worded content, he ensures he puts everything he's got into making his work stand out. With his expertise in writing, Joshua works to scrutinize pieces of literature.
