amine the intricacies of book culture in Westerosi society. 
More broadly, I want to posit that contemporary fantasy authors are both 
fascinated by texts, and also troubled by their limite d chance of survival over 
the very long periods that the genre tends to sketch. Deep time is hostile to book 
knowledge, but it is the very loss, or disappearance, of knowledge that poses the 
greatest challenges to fantasy realms. Contemporary fantasy is oc cupied by the 
assumption that knowledge must be sought where it is hidden; that book 
learning is marginalized and dismissed; that there is a scarcity of both books and 
knowledge more generally; but that the ‘hidden truth’ might not, in the end, be 
trustworthy. In short, transmission of information is threatened; and as the thing 
at stake in A Song of Ice and Fire  is nothing less that the survival of human 
civilization, these anxieties speak to contemporary fears about societal 
transience and preservation. 
 
1 Ciacomo Guidici has written an excellent chapter that focuses only on the Game of Thrones 
HBO show, where he argues that writing is symbolically connected to power. Apart from 
one point in my analysis, I will mostly leave the HBO series Game of Thrones (2011–2019) 
out of the discussion. 
I 
Maria Damkjær 
162  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Within each fantasy world, books occupy a social, cultural and 
economic space, but what are the intricacies of that space? Are books privileged, 
or are they marginal? As Nicholas Birns has argued, fantasy might be defined 
by the difficulty with which infor mation is transmitted within its worlds 
(“‘When You Have Read It’” 58).2 Books are often scarce in fantasy worlds, and 
neither messages nor books travel seamlessly or quickly between people. But 
that does not necessarily mean that books are precious: on the contrary, books 
are often ignored, not least by those in power, in Mar tin’s epic series. The 
world’s diegetic readers, those with true appreciation for the delights of the 
library, are invested with a certain underdog quality. Are book people good 
people? What does that mean for extradiegetic readers of fantasy often fiercel y 
committed to reading long book series and, in the age of social media, displaying 
bookcases full of physical books? We expect, for this group of readers especially, 
a certain investment in books as significant objects. What is the appeal for 
contemporary fantasy readers of a literature where books are neglected? More, 
what does that say about our investments in the cultural significance of the 
book? Does the narrative trope that requires characters to recover lost and vital 
knowledge reflect a desire in o ur world to fetishize books, to cast them as 
culturally significant objects?  
In short: how much does the treatment of books within a fantasy series 
reflect metafictionally on the status of books in our own world? As Marie-Laure 
Ryan has pointed out, fantasy literature tends to be immersive, with very little 
breaking of the fourth w all, that classic trait of metafiction (4 –10). Martin’s 
writing in A Song of Ice and Fire  is an exploration of immersion, Joseph Rex 
Young has shown (see for example 74 –77). But metafictionality can be implicit 
or metaphoric, according to Andrea Macrae (18–19). When characters in A Song 
of Ice and Fire  treasure or discard books, I would argue that the narrative is 
implicitly commenting on what it means to be a reader, a book lover, and on 
how books fit into our world. This might mean that our investment in material 
book culture turns out to be nostalgic for a privileged past where, in reality, few 
had access to books; or to fetishize certain kinds of knowledge; or to valorize 
readers because reading is perceived to be under threat in contemporary society. 
The way a fantasy series communicates with its own readers about reading may 
be flattering or consoling or cognitively dissonant. After all, many fantasy series, 
including A Song of Ice and Fire , allow readers to vicariously witness the 
destruction of books and libraries; what appeal does such a literature of loss 
have to contemporary book lovers? 
Epic fantasy as a genre is about the deep impact of past events, often 
long forgotten (Sangster 20). But how do characters in fantasy novels access the 
 
2 As opposed to science fiction, where information is generally easy to transmit. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  163 
past, and how can they trust what they find? The novel form itself is inherently 
about gradual revelation; it orders a set of events but often withholds key 
information from characters or readers. Fantasy novels are sometimes about 
quests, but often they a re also about moving from an incomplete or naive 
understanding of the world to a more complete one. That journey involves 
recovery; of lived experience (a witness who was alive and can attest to past 
events) or of transmitted information (books or other da ta technologies). 
Matthew Sangster points out that “[f]antasy creators of numerous stripes —
makers and remakers of fictions inevitably derived from the languages and 
customs or our world—are fascinated by the processes through which language, 
fantasy and be lief collaborate to define and redefine the parameters of culture 
and imagination” (58). However, from the inception of epic fantasy in J.R.R. 
Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings and associated texts, the possibility of preserving 
the past in written form has been a topic of apprehension. As Vladimir Brljak 
has argued, “Tolkien’s mature fiction is centrally concerned precisely with [the] 
inability of the text to ever take us to that vanished, irretrievable ‘there,’ from 
which even living memory was but the first remove” (6). While Tolkien invested 
himself in a “pseudobibliographical metafictional interface” (6) —the idea that 
the novels are in fact translations of originals written by characters in the story—
Brljak argues that this creates not immersion, but dist ance, between the reader 
and the events. However, as Gergely Nagy has argued, through his elaborate 
metafictional frameworks, Tolkien “represents and creates cultural processes 
and contents in terms of textual activities, by the device of various sorts of texts 
and their interrelations” (642). 3 Tolkien’s interest in the minutiae of textual 
transmission was to persevere in much epic fantasy, and while his deep 
knowledge of bibliography is unique, some authors display sensitivity in how 
they imagine and construct the production, transmission and p reservation (or 
not) of the material book. 
Books are technologies that are underpinned by institutional 
investment of labor and significance. As D.F. McKenzie has pointed out, “[a] 
book is never simply a remarkable object. Like every other technology, it is 
invariably the product of human agency in complex and highly volatile 
contexts” (4). As Eric Hayot lays out in Information: A Reader, there are three basic 
social processes at work around “information”: “storing, organizing, and 
communicating” (Hayot 8). The first process, storing, requires a for m, either 
material or immaterial, in physical matter or in human memory, all of which 
 
3 Birns argues that although Gandalf visits archives to discover the history of the One Ring, 
the hobbits, and therefore also the reader, find history on the road ( Literary Role 9). Peter 
Grybauskas has explored the “untold tales” of Tolkien’s work: “the frames, the edges, 
allusions, lacunae, the borders between story and un-story, gaps and spaces between vast 
Ages and miniscule periods in an ellipsis” (xvii). 
Maria Damkjær 
164  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
require systems, rituals, and investments of time. It will have taken labor and 
resources to put together a library in Westeros. In A Song of Ice and Fire, storage 
happens in libraries that belong to families (for example the Starks) or to 
organizations (the Night’s Watch, the Citadel, the royal library at the Red Keep), 
and which are not publicly accessible. Books denote status, and only a small 
percentage of the population can even read; books are unevenly distributed. 
The book as an object, as a cultural and social thing, speaks to the 
literary world’s deeper assumptions about knowledge, and about the survival 
of information from one age to the next. By extension, this article is also about 
contemporary anxieties about preservation. Since most epic fantasy is concerned 
with long timespans, it is tempting to see the description of books, texts, and 
other transfers of information, as a continual engagement with the inevitability 
of our own civilizational loss, given a larg e enough timescale. How much will 
be lost; how much is lost every day? What if somehow what was lost actually 
held the power to extend or renew a civilization; what if cultural memory was 
somehow the most important thing? There is a tinge of defiant nostalgia in the 
investment in books, storytelling, and scholarship that permeates contemporary 
fantasy literature. Does this nostalgia express a feeling of loss of centrality, a 
marginalization of book learnin g at the expense of technical innovation and 
quick consumption of information? 
 
MANUSCRIPT BOOK CULTURE IN WESTEROS 
Valyrian swords are precious, highly valued, and forged in magic. 
They do not rust or deteriorate, they are difficult to damage or reforge, and they 
give their owners a clear advantage over both mundane and supernatural 
enemies. Valyrian swords embody, in their seemingly incorruptible forms, 
ancient knowledge, now impossible to reconstruct. 
Valyrian scrolls, on the other hand, are almost universally ignored in 
Westeros. A few key book lovers mention them and consider them precious: 
when Tyrion instructs a young septon at Winterfell: “Be gentle with the Valyrian 
scrolls, the parchment is very dry,” he is naming bookish objects that both have 
an incalculable age and great physical fragility (GoT 82). 4 The septon does not 
speak, but seems startled that anyone would care. More often than not, scrolls 
are described as “crumbling” (CoK 385). Valyrian scrolls are exceedingly rare: 
in A Feast for Crows , we learn that “[s]ome of the old Valyrian scrolls down in 
the locked vaults [of the Citadel] were said to be the only surviving copies in the 
world” (16).  When Sam recounts his discoveries in the library of Castle Black—
 
4 In what follows, I will use the following abbreviations: GoT for A Game of Thrones, CoK 
for A Clash of Kings, SoS1 for A Storm of Swords 1, SoS2 for A Storm of Swords 2, FfC for A 
Feast for Crows, DwD1 for A Dance with Dragons 1, DwD2 for A Dance with Dragons 2. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  165 
a scene I will come back to below —he lists off: “works that even the Citadel 
doesn’t have, scrolls from old Valyria, counts of the seasons written by maesters 
dead a thousand years . . . ” (CoK 82). The scrolls from old Valyria form only 
one item on a long list: they represent the oldest surviving book technology, but 
their contents are rarely mentioned. Their survival across four centuries or more 
has not made them central to contemporary culture in the way that swords are. 
Instead, Valyrian scrolls are ba ckground clutter, an elevated form of detritus. 
Unlike the swords, they seemingly have no inherent magic to keep them 
pristine. Both swords and scrolls represent now inaccessible knowledge, 
material survivors from a culture destroyed by catastrophe, but only the scrolls 
are marked narratively as irrelevant. With a few exceptions, nearly all of them 
remain narratively rolled-up, or reduced to crumbling materiality, falling apart 
in characters’ hands. They are signs for information that no one reads, markers 
for the deep past and for the limits of memory.  
Most of the books that are in practical use in the series are in codex 
form. Book culture in The Song of Ice and Fire is a manuscript culture. Among the 
technology that Martin depicts, the printing press is absent. Both parchment and 
paper are mentioned in relation to books and letters, suggesting that both must 
be in use. However, we see no working authors, book -binders, and almost no 
booksellers. There is an oblique reference by Cat of the canals (Arya) to a 
bookseller in Bravos (FfC 572), and Sam sees ou tdoor book stalls and working 
scribes in Oldtown (FfC 767), but those are the only references to book 
commerce. None of the book -loving characters in the series are seen buying a 
book; not even Tyrion, who could afford it. We do not learn where he got his 
wedding present to Joffrey—since it was extremely rare, it would not have been 
from any common bookseller, and might have come from the Casterly Rock 
library, assuming such a thing exists. 
Martin overwhelmingly describes books as “old,” “dusty,” “leather -
bound,” and “heavy.” In Winterfell, Tyrion is reading a “heavy leather-bound” 
book, a “hundred-year-old discourse on the changing of the seasons by a long -
dead maester” (GoT 82). The book Ne d reads that clues him to the inherited 
traits that should be present in all Robert’s children is also “a ponderous tome” 
(GoT 246) with “brittle yellow pages,” with “dusty lists of weddings, births, and 
deaths” (GoT 266). Metonymically, the “ponderous” an d “dusty” hundred -
year-old book bleeds over to the contents as well. Several leather -bound books 
are mentioned in Riverrun, Harrenhal and Castle Black in A Clash of Kings —
castles seem to have books, a sign of inherited wealth and status. Often 
designated as “great leather tomes” (SoS2 160), books are almost always 
associated with physical age, with historical chronicles of events long passed, 
and with irrelevance to most o f the characters. There is no balancing 
proliferation of “new,” “fresh” books, and onl y one light -weight book —King 
Maria Damkjær 
166  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Daeron’s Conquest of Dorne , which is “slender” (SoS1 163), but still old. For 
whatever reason, books are depicted as already -there: persisting, but not 
renewing. It is not a given that Martin intended to portray a dying or already -
dead book culture; it may simply be an omission, within the many, many deeply 
layered depictions of the gradations of Westerosi society, that he shows no 
writers, scriptoria, or book-binders. There are also no scenes of wine-making, in 
spite of the fact that wine is ubiquitous. But it is certain that Martin depicts books 
as already-ancient, often accumulated by older generations or even ignored for 
a century. Tyrion and Sam are the only young book -lovers, and both are 
marginalized. 
I would argue that this is not an oversight from Martin’s side: the 
foundational point about Westeros is that information is sparse, ignored, 
fragmented, and contradictory. A thriving book culture would not necessarily 
counter that, but nevertheless the disregard for book learning is, I would argue, 
a sustained metaphor for misrule and dangerous forgetfulness (see Hunter). 
Book production does make information material, transmissible, and portable. 
Westeros, we might infer, has not invested its resources to wards the material 
instantiation of information. Book culture is described as a long decline, reduced 
to the obsession of a few widely derided book lovers, who live in a book world 
that is left behind by previous generations, but which slowly crumbles as t hey 
turn the pages or unroll the scrolls. The people that populate this story are living 
in history; many of them make history; all of the older main characters have 
participated directly in changing its course. A decade and half before the story 
starts, Robert Baratheon overthrew the Targaryen dynasty and took the throne 
for himself; the story revolves around the uncertain succession after Robert dies. 
For people feeling themselves to be living in active history, the past is irrelevant. 
If a society’s twin  preoccupations are war and winter, it will tend to focus on 
weapons and food, not on books. The aura of books, including their age, is 
suggestive of past ideals that will become increasingly embattled and irrelevant 
as the civil war progresses; Martin is using elegiac book culture to craft the sense 
of an ageing society ill-equipped to handle the challenges to come. 
 
BOOK LOVERS; BOOK INDIFFERENCE; BOOK BURNING 
Sam and Tyrion are the two main book lovers in A Song of Ice and Fire. 
Both are marginalized socially even if they are from privileged backgrounds, 
mainly because neither has the body type or liking for martial prowess, a set of 
skills highly prized in the violence -centric society of Westeros. As pointed out 
by Mikayla Hunter, “there seems to be an inverse relationship within Westerosi 
society between physical ability and academic interest” (48). Books tend to be 
associated with individual characters, rather than institutionalized repositories: 
while Maester Luwin lives in close proximity to Winterfell’s library tower, his 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  167 
solar (study) is crammed with books that seem to speak peculiarly to his 
character: Bran describes Maester Luwin’s “[t]ottering piles of books [that] 
covered tables and chairs” (GoT 711) , his “clutter of books and scrolls and 
bottles” (CoK 399). Similarly, Maester Cressen’s solar at Dragonstone is 
comfortably bookish: Cressen is settled “behind his books and papers” in front 
of “the parchment he’d been reading” (CoK 2, 18). Both maesters are practical 
and versatile scholars, but their relationship with books is foundational to their 
characters: they “cram” books together, they “pile” them up. In other words, 
they are bibliophiles. Books in large numbers have positive connotations. 
Morally suspect maesters, on the other hand, are rarely mentioned in relation to 
book culture: Pycelle’s solar is characterized instead by a meticulous store of 
potions and poisons, as seen by the book lover Tyrion (CoK 239).5 
Characters who align with traditional “heroic” traits tend to be 
indifferent to books. 6 Ned Stark only reluctantly reads the book of lineages by 
Malleon, a “dusty [list] of weddings, births, and deaths” ( GoT 266). Jon Snow, 
as we shall see below, humors Sam’s enthusiasm for the Castle Black library but 
does not take part in it; his mind is on the coming journey north. Mikayla Hunter 
argues that “Jon’s slow -growing appreciation for the value of education is 
central to his character development over the course of the series,” but initially, 
he is less than enthusiastic (49). And while Davos learns to read for duty, after 
he has been named Stannis’s hand, he explicitly rejects reading for pleasure as a 
part of that endeavor. “My lord, perhaps you would like to try a bit of Conquest 
of Dorne as well?’ [Pylos] slid the slender leather -bound book across the table. 
‘King Daeron wrote with an elegant simplicity, and his history is rich with 
blood, battle, and bravery. Your son is quite engrossed” (SoS2 163). Davos rejects 
the idea explicitly because it is too enjoyable: “Davos enjoyed a good story as 
well as any man, but Stannis had not named him Hand for his enjoyment, he 
felt. His first duty was to help his king ru le, and for that he must needs 
understand the words the ravens brought. The best way to learn a thing was to 
do it, he had found; sails and scrolls, it made no matter” (163–64).  
Davos’s rejection of the Conquest of Dorne —the only book to be 
described as thin, and one of the few “engross[ing]” books ever mentioned—has 
immediate narrative consequences, too: the letter he reads for his lesson propels 
the plot forward, leading to Stannis’s decision to travel to the Wall. Ther e is no 
time for the heroic reader. This is mirrored by the trajectory of Rhaegar 
Targaryen. Ser Arys Oakheart (disguised as Arstan Whitebeard), tells Dany that 
 
5 Maesters in general are not seen as a repository of crucial knowledge. Brian Cowlishaw 
argues that “[m]uch of what the maesters “know” is wrong; much that is essential to know, 
they deny, ignore, or mistakenly consider a tale for children” (62). 
6 For the vexed question of the “hero” in A Song of Ice and Fire, see Johnston, “Grief.” 
Maria Damkjær 
168  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Rhaegar as a boy was “bookish to a fault,” but that “one day Prince Rhaegar 
found something in his scrolls that changed him.” Out of the blue, he told the 
master-of-arms that “I will require sword and armor. It seems I must be a 
warrior” (SoS 111). When Rhaegar accepts the call to be a hero, he rejects the call 
of books. Significantly, his epiphany came from scrolls, not books —a hint that 
Rhaegar was consulting ancient knowledge. 
The destruction of books is not a central theme of A Song of Ice and Fire, 
and books are never destroyed to eradicate cultures, to stamp out troublesome 
knowledge, or to punish knowledge communities. Melisandre burns effigies of 
the seven gods, she burns people, and characters express alarm at both of those 
actions, but she nev er burns books. 7 The largest book-burning in the series, by 
volume of destruction, is the fire in the Winterfell library tower, but even that is 
not a deliberate biblioclasm, but a diversion by Bran’s would -be assassin. The 
way it is narrated is markedly distanced, throug h the eyes of a character —
Catelyn—who is not worried about the library, but only about Bran’s safety: 
 
Fire, she thought, and then, Bran! “Help me,” she said urgently, sitting 
up. “Help me with Bran.” Robb did not seem to hear her. “The library 
tower’s on fire,” he said. Catelyn could see the flickering reddish light 
through the open window now. She sagged with relief. Bran was safe. 
The library was across the bailey, there was no way the fire could reach 
them here. “Thank the gods,” she whispere d. Robb looked at her as if 
she’d gone mad. (GoT 125) 
 
The narrative technique here is to let Catelyn, as the focalizer, filter the 
information through her: the fire is far away, and in the face of her real concern, 
Bran’s safety, the fate of the library is immaterial. Both those that set the fire —
the hired assassins—and Catelyn the focalizer, see the fire as incidental to their 
real concerns. The books are collateral damage.8 This ironic distance to an event 
that Martin’s readers might be expected to care about is symptomatic of the 
status of books in the series: people in this world do not always value the same 
(bookish) things that modern readers might care about. 
The only characters who deliberately destroy books are Joffrey —who 
hacks a priceless illuminated chronicle by Maester Kaeth to pieces as a taunt of 
his uncle Tyrion —and Roose Bolton. 9 While Joffrey’s book destruction shows 
 
7 It is possible that this is a function of the relatively late introduction of the central 
religious text of the new religion, The Seven-Pointed Star, into the narrative; it does not 
appear until A Feast for Crows (414). 
8 Larsen interprets the burning of the library as much more significant than I do (48). 
9 Joffrey’s book destruction happens in SoS2 (231–33). 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  169 
him to be petty, drunk on power, and insecure, Roose Bolton’s scene of book 
burning, witnessed by Arya, is more enigmatic:  
 
Roose Bolton was seated by the hearth reading from a thick leather -
bound book as she entered. […] Bolton turned a few more pages with 
his finger, then closed the book and placed it carefully in the fire. He 
watched the flames consume it, pale eyes shining with reflected light. 
The old dry leather went up with a whoosh, and the yellow pages stirred 
as they burned, as if some ghost were reading them. (CoK 810) 
 
The scene is disturbing both because of the measured and dispassionate way 
Bolton burns the book, and because we never learn his reasons. Bolton never 
expresses any opinions that would explain this action, and he does not act like 
a zealot. His book -burning does, however, represent his disregard for 
conventional ethics, and his tendency to allow or perpetrate wanton destruction 
and suffering. His casual decision to partially read a book, and then consign it 
to the flames, also represents the danger that war  poses to books. Presumably 
this book belonged to the Whent family but was left behind when Harrenhal 
was taken. Books, like people, rely on political stability and the protection of 
local lords to survive. Roose Bolton’s book destruction is less a referen ce to 
biblioclasm than it is a representation of the incidental destruction of all forms 
of knowledge when society falls into chaos. It most mirrors, not other book 
burnings, but the fate of the smallfolk of the riverlands, mistreated by successive 
armies from both sides of the conflict. 
 
THE LIBRARY AND THE METADATA  
In A Clash of Kings, Jon finds Sam in the Castle Black library, which at 
first paradoxically seems like a place of bookish plenty: “The air smelled of 
paper and dust and years. Before him, tall wooden shelves rose up into dimness, 
crammed with leather-bound books and bins of ancient scrolls” (CoK 84). It is a 
scene of book abundance, but every step of it reveals that it is tinged with loss. 
The library is a doomed treasure trove: 
 
Sam yawned. “Maester Aemon sent me to find maps for the Lord 
Commander. I never thought . . . Jon, the books, have you ever seen their 
like? There are thousands!” [Jon] gazed about him. “The library at 
Winterfell has more than a hundred. Did you find the maps?” […] 
[Sam] shoved some scrolls aside to reveal a dusty volume bound in 
rotted leather. “This,” he said reverently, “is the account of a journey 
from the Shadow Tower all the way to Lorn Point on the Frozen Shore, 
written by a ranger named Redwyn. It’s  not dated, but he mentions a 
Dorren Stark as King in the North, so it must be from before the 
Maria Damkjær 
170  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Conquest.” […] “There’s more maps. If I had time to search . . . 
everything’s a jumble. I could set it all to order, though, I know I could, 
but it would take time . . . well, years, in truth.” “Mormont wanted those 
maps a little sooner than that.” Jon plucked a scroll from a bin, blew of 
the worst of the dust. A corner flaked off between his fingers as he 
unrolled it. “Look, this one is crumbling,” he said, frowning over the 
faded script. “Be gentle.” Sam came around the table and took the scroll 
from his hands, holding it as if it were a wounded animal. “The 
important books used to be copied over when they needed it. Some of 
the oldest have been copied half a hundred times, probably.” (84–85) 
 
While the books at Castle Black are falling apart, the passage contains 
a more oblique echo of loss: the reader knows that the Winterfell library tower 
was burned in the assassination attempt on Bran. Just at the moment Sam has 
found a huge library, we are  reminded that libraries can burn. But there is a 
more immediate threat. Ultimately, it is not book -burning, but neglect, that is 
the greatest danger to a library. As Matthew Battles has argued,  
 
[b]efore the flames, before theft and censorship, the fate of books is 
bound up in the constant shuffling and transformation of the word in 
all its uses. […] The libraries of Alexandria probably shared a modest 
fate, moldering slowly through the centuries as people grew indifferent 
and even hostile to their contents. […] Ignored by the generations to 
whom they were indecipherable, the scrolls would have been damaged 
by alternating periods of moisture and aridity, eaten by the troublesome 
fauna and flora that have evolved especially to live in the library, stolen, 
lost, and, yes, burned. (31, 32) 
 
The material in Sam’s hands was meant to be “copied over,” i.e. 
integrated into a self -renewing book culture that carried knowledge from one 
material embodiment into the next: in other words, a scriptorium. Sam knows 
that the library used to be maintained by a staff of scribes and copyists, maester 
librarians, cartographers, and chroniclers. The Night’s Watch must once have 
produced, organized, and preserved knowledge, but now, after a century of 
funding cuts, those efforts have stopped. They seem to have l eft no catalogues: 
in this library, as in many other fantastical libraries in literature, Janet Brennan 
Croft’s observation holds true: “we seldom see the use of higher -level finding 
aids like catalogs, indexes, cross -reference lists, and so on. The key to  finding 
anything in the collection seems to exist primarily in the vast memory of the 
person in charge of it —or the good luck, instincts, and perseverance of the 
person doing the digging” (90). We must assume that the maps Sam finds are 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  171 
out of date, but there is no alternative: knowledge production, as well as its 
preservation, has stopped. 
The scene pulls in two directions: it gives us tantalizing glimpses of 
untold detail, but allows Sam no narrative time to explore it: 
 
“I found drawings of the faces in the trees, and a book about the tongue 
of the children of the forest . . . works that even the Citadel doesn’t have, 
scrolls from old Valyria, counts of the seasons written by maesters dead 
a thousand years . . .” (CoK 86) 
 
Sam only has time to give a list; metadata, if you will, only the outline of what 
might be in the archive. The list enumerates both ancient material (Valyrian 
scrolls) and long -forgotten scholarly enquiry (at some point, someone tried to 
record the faces i n the heart trees). Information, in other words, has a deep 
history in the diegetic world, but no narrative future. To modern eyes, the 
“counts of the seasons written by maesters dead a thousand years” look like 
vital environmental data, given the parallel s between the threatening Long 
Night and climate change. 10 This scene represents the promise of answers, 
fullness, and completion, but defers them: Martin holds out the trope of the 
library as “a location for endless discovery,” in Michelle Anjirbag’s formulation, 
but then deliberately disappoints it (80). For the reader, this is a case of deferred 
book gratification. Both Sam and the reader end up feeling what Carolyn 
Steedman has called “archive fever”: 
 
You know you will not finish, that there will be something left unread, 
unnoted, untranscribed. […] Your anxiety is more precise, and more 
prosaic. It’s about PT S2/1/1, which only arrived from the stacks that 
afternoon, which is enormous, and which you will never get through 
tomorrow. (18, emphasis in original) 
 
Sam’s list is about that immediacy of archive fever; instead of the vast and 
amorphous archive, he focuses on the few texts he has had time for. When Jon 
questions the value of a bill for dried cod, Sam exclaims: “You can learn so much 
from ledgers like that, truly you can. It can tell you how many men were in the 
Night’s Watch then, how they lived, what they ate . . . ” (CoK 86). An instinctive 
historian, Sam understands what details mean. But there is never enough time 
in the archive.  
Kristine Larsen has claimed that books, in A Song of Ice and Fire , hold 
the potential to solve the problems facing its main characters: “Sometimes the 
wisdom of the departed is the very thing that will assure our survival, [for 
 
10 Climate allegory is discussed in Di Paolo and Laukkanen. 
Maria Damkjær 
172  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
example] through the transmission of knowledge” (52). We do not know if, in 
the two books still to be published in the series, the answers to the various 
mysteries will be solved by reading books. A Dance with Dragons  sees Sam 
researching the Others and Aemond leaving Jon a book that mentions Azor 
Ahai. The problem is always that the individuals who learn things from books 
are just that: individuals, fragile, and in danger. Sam and Aemond are driven 
disastrously off course on their way to Citadel book heaven; Jon applies the Azor 
Ahai myth only to Stannis and his counterfeit burning sword, and is then 
assassinated by his own sworn brothers. Knowledge needs to be instantiated 
into a person, preferably someone with the power to act on it, before it is useful, 
but those people, in A Song of Ice and Fire, are vulnerable. In the TV series, Jon is 
resurrected and Sam learns of Jon’s Targaryen parentage from a diary held in 
the Citadel, but we do not know if that would be the outcome in Martin’s 
projected final book s, nor whether Sam having that knowledge, or even Bran 
learning it from his tree network, would actually change anything. What is 
certain is that in the book series, books alone are inert, and humans, once they 
have absorbed book knowledge, are vulnerable and often isolated. It is not just 
access to books that is a problem, but whether you understand what you have 
learned, and whether you will live to apply it to your, and the world’s, problems.  
 
CHRONICLES AND THE USE OF HISTORIOGRAPHY 
Book culture in Westeros is undoubtedly modelled on a medieval and 
early modern European template, but it is colored with an implicit but powerful 
impression: in Westeros, those who wield power seem indifferent to the written 
word. The monarchy employs no chroniclers (or at least, they are not 
mentioned), and the culture of history writing seems to have either died out, or 
been enclaved in the Citadel, outside of narrative reach for most of the five 
books. The opening sentence of Fire and Blood tells us about “the maesters of the 
Citadel who keep the histories of Westeros,” suggesting that history writing is 
confined to the ivory tower and not encouraged, funded, or even much noticed 
by the political rulers of King’s Landing. 11 Jaime Lannister writes in the White 
Book, a list of Kingsguard knights and their deeds, which is the only hint we 
have of any written source that references Robert’s Rebellion and the fall of the 
Targaryen dynasty (SoS2 435).12 If historiography is undertaken at the Citadel, it 
still remains absent from the consciousness of the rulers in King’s Landing. 
When history books are mentioned in passing —Tyrion is reading “Beldecar’s 
 
11 The extradiegetic book Fire and Blood, published in 2018, doubles as a diegetic chronicle, 
written by Maester Gyldayn, but its diegetic year of publication is unclear. 
12 The White Book bears echoes of the warrior chronicles of, for example, Jean Froissart. 
See Given-Wilson 99–111. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  173 
History of the Rhoynish Wars” (SoS1 166), for example—their creation is always 
a thing of the past. King Daeron wrote his Conquest of Dorne to celebrate his own 
achievement, and it is a book still discussed for its inaccuracy: it is both called 
“vainglorious” (DwD1 267) and “boastful” (DwD1 346), and in Dorne i t clearly 
rankles that the Young Dragon exaggerated his achievements (FfC 678). The 
book achieved its aim by making Daeron a byword for clever military tactics 
and youthful daring in most of the Seven Kingdoms—but not in Dorne. 
Such propagandistic use of history writing, however, seems to have 
died out. Renly Baratheon, whose brother had taken the throne by force, at one 
point explains how little chronicling or historical legitimacy have played into 
his brother’s rule: 
 
Renly shrugged. “Tell me, what right did my brother Robert ever have 
to the Iron Throne?” He did not wait for an answer. “Oh, there was talk 
of the blood ties between Baratheon and Targaryen, of weddings a 
hundred years past, of second sons and elder daughters. No one but the 
maesters care about any of it. Robert won the throne with his 
warhammer.” (CoK 319) 
 
Renly is making a self -serving point here, because he is himself trying to take 
the throne after Robert’s death. Arguably, since the Baratheon genealogical 
claim was so feeble that it had to resort to “second sons and elder daughters,” 
there was not much point in trying to win the argument that way. But he is not 
wrong about the status of history writing in Westeros. There is no mention of an 
official chronicle of Robert’s Rebellion or of his rule; or of any attempt to 
legitimize his takeover. Aerys’s crimes are everywhere talked about, but we do 
not see them documented or set down for posterity.  
This forms an intriguing contrast to medieval European history. 
Gabrielle Spiegel has described how the French kings used history writing, 
undertaken at the monastery of Saint Denis, to consolidate their power over the 
many semi-independent regions of France, and to streamline their dynastic right 
to rule (209). Chris Given-Wilson, while he argues that overwhelmingly English 
kings did not sponsor history writing between the thirteenth and fifteenth 
centuries, shows how Edward I and John of Gaunt both seemin gly requested 
that monasteries send them chronicles —and monks to explain them —to 
legitimize their rights to (respectively) Scottish overlordship and the English 
throne (Given -Wilson 65, 70, 75). The chronicler Jean Froissart, who was 
employed by Philippa of Hainault, queen to Edward III, wrote extensively of the 
early events of the Wars of the Roses, much of which he lived through, and some 
of which he would have witnessed at her court (Castor 11, 242; Devaux). Later 
in the Wars of the Roses, Yorkist propag anda writers used the chronicle forms 
to argue for Edward IV’s right to rule, and his ascension was supported by 
Maria Damkjær 
174  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
extensive genealogies (Radulescu 406; Alan). As Raluca Radulescu argues, “the 
period of time after Edward IV’s ascent to the throne was characterized by an 
increase in the number of royal pedigrees and chronicles. Edward needed both 
to justify his claim to  the throne and to gather popular support for his future 
military campaigns in order to recover territories in Scotland and France” (407). 
A near -contemporary propaganda account of Edward IV’s exile and return, 
“The Historie of the Arrivall of King Edward IV,” was most likely written by a 
servant in his court (Ross 432–33).  
Edward IV is one of the primary historical models for Robert 
Baratheon, but Robert and those around him seem to have invested no time or 
energy in any such legitimisation of his claim. Past events do matter. At the start 
of A Game of Thrones , the adult characters have lived through violent and 
contentious events, and those events continue to colour their interpretation of 
current events, their motivations, and their actions. They have lived, and are 
living, in history. But that history is nei ther justified by, or committed to, a 
broader tradition of written history. Books are not weapons: only weapons are 
weapons in Westeros. 
 
ORAL CULTURE AND NARRATIVE LOSS 
Like Tolkien’s Middle -earth, Martin’s diegetic world is “a mixture of 
oral and literate cultures” (Lee 51). As Walter Ong has pointed out, “in 
functionally oral cultures the past is not felt as an itemized terrain, peppered 
with verifiable and disputed ‘facts’ or bits of information. It is the domain of the 
ancestors, a resonant source for renewing awareness of present existence, which 
itself is not an itemized terrain either” (97). To write a novel series about oral 
culture is a contradiction in terms, of course: novels participate in written 
culture, and when they portray mechanisms that make the past “resonant” 
through the spoken word, the result is often elegiac. That irony—that the novel 
evokes modes of transmission that cannot realistically be recorded —is alive in 
the narrative fabric of A Song of Ice and Fire . In Martin’s epic series, oral and 
written cultures coexist, but neither seems adequate to maintain a link with past 
knowledge. 
We see the failure of both oral transmission and book culture when 
Lord Commander Mormont realizes that the Others truly exist. He exclaims to 
Sam: 
 
We never knew! But we must have known once. The Night’s Watch has 
forgotten its true purpose, Tarly. You don’t build a wall seven hundred 
feet high to keep savages in skins from stealing women. The Wall was 
made to guard the realms of men . . . and not against other men, which is 
all the wildlings are when you come right down to it. Too many years, 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  175 
Tarly, too many hundreds and thousands of years. We lost sight of the 
true enemy. (SoS1 451) 
 
Mormont here uses a “we” that transcends history: the Night’s Watch 
becomes a chain of guardians somehow charged with remembering; one long 
consciousness capable of “forgetting” its purpose and the threat which it was 
created to fight. Mormont encompasses himself in this “we,” a collapsing of 
generations that were meant to keep memory alive as much as fight a 
supernatural foe. 
The problem is that the objective truth, which we know the Others to 
be, has been relegated to, literally, old wives’ tales, represented by Old Nan. She 
is an easily dismissible figure, being both old and a woman, and one who seems 
to be losing her grasp on the linear progression of time. Bran, a precocious eight-
year-old, is right at the cusp of starting to question her authority. When he 
angrily tells her “I hate your stupid stories,” she reacts calmly: “My stories? No, 
my little lord, not mine. The stories are, before me and after me, before you too” 
(GoT 321). Her timescale is inhuman, but she stands as an instantiation of 
knowledge that goes beyond the individual: “[s]he had lived so long, Mother 
had told him once, that all the Brandon Starks had become one p erson in her 
head” (GoT 231 –32). This collapse of all the different Brandons is not just a 
mirror of Mormont’s enduring “we,” but also of the tree network that Bran will 
eventually access; another form of temporal collapse, but a magical one. In other 
words, what it takes for memory to be kept live is an extra -rational, sometimes 
magical commingling with the past, a state of temporal flux that runs counter to 
the dominant rationalist attitude. As Jessica Walker has argued, “[c]yclical 
history is perha ps the most powerful force in Martin’s series” (81). Old Nan’s 
stories of the Long Night are warnings about its return, but she lives on the 
margins of a world that believes itself to be rational. 
The truth is literally fantastical, but the general tenor of Westerosi 
society is that oral culture is a tale, not truth. Westerosi song culture bears this 
out. Sansa is obsessed with “songs” (always plural in her focalized chapters) that 
weave heroics int o daily life, but lives to learn that the songs are lies. Around 
her, martial society uses songs to pretend the world is more heroic than it is, but 
realists like Sandor Clegane have learned to mistrust the fantasy of the 
enchanted past brought into the gl orious present. Gabrielle M. Spiegel has 
argued that in oral culture, “human action is best understood by comparison 
with the legacy of stories about the past, and the fundamental goal of oral 
recitation is, precisely, to revivify the past and make it live in the present” (184). 
On many levels of Westerosi high society, this remains a comforting lie: bread 
and circuses to keep the masses faithful. For the powerful, the past tends to stay 
Maria Damkjær 
176  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
safely in the past, the dead stay dead, and heroes only come back through 
trickery (as when Renly’s ghost supposedly joins the Battle of the Blackwater).  
On a metafictional level, however, the songs achieve a narrative power: 
they foreshadow and interweave. “The Rains of Castamere” is used to 
foreshadow the Red Wedding; “The Bear and the Maiden Fair” precedes 
Brienne’s violent meeting with a bear in a mêlée  ring; “Hands of Gold,” 
ostensibly a satirical song about Tyrion’s relationship with Shae, becomes a 
prophecy about her murder at his hands. In other words, the knitting together 
of past and present through songs happens ironically, in the narrative structure, 
around a series of characters who do not see their lives as tales, and who have 
mostly learned to distrust the songs. They do not have access to the kinds of 
parallels that the songs metafictionally suggest, until they are smacked in the 
face with them and have to survive (or die). 
This metafictional play with readerly knowledge and character 
skepticism extends to the narrative structure of the first two books. A Game of 
Thrones starts with a prologue focalized by a member of the Night’s Watch who 
sees one of the Others (also known as White Walkers). The chapter ends when 
the Other kills him. In the next chapter, focalized by Bran, the last witness to this 
supernatural attack is beheaded by Ned for desertion. Significantly, Bran hears, 
but quickly forgets, his last words, and they are  not relayed (GoT 12). This loss 
of knowledge symbolizes the inaccessibility of what we readers have seen, but 
characters never will. For the rest of the book, characters continually deny what 
we know to be true, namely that the Others have returned. In ot her words, the 
reader is invited, from the beginning, to mistrust received wisdom and to 
tentatively believe in the “hearth tale” and the myth. The second book, A Clash 
of Kings, starts with a similar metafictional demonstration. Uniquely in the book 
series, the book opens with an event that can be witnessed from all over 
Westeros and Essos: the red comet. But crucially, everyone interprets it to suit 
their own purposes: for some the comet is Lannister red, for some it heralds the 
success of Mormont’s quest  beyond the wall, and so on. As Brian Cowlishaw 
argues of the red comet sequence, Martin “displays consecutive examples of 
how knowledge is contingent at best, or wish fulfilment at worst. […] He 
virtually begs us to nurture doubt in him as a reliable stor yteller” (66). I would 
suggest that what we are being invited to doubt is not necessarily the storyteller, 
but the very idea that there is a place of truth at all. Everyone in Westeros has 
opinions, but the narrative denies us certainty. As Johnston and Ba ttis argue, 
“Martin’s diversity of perspectives reminds us that the game of thrones is also a 
game of knowing, a puzzling chain of views that are sometimes linked, but 
which often fail to make contact at crucial points, just as our own perspective as 
readers cannot possibly hold everything together” (9). These two book openings 
demonstrate, metafictionally, two central tenets about the series’ portrayal of 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  177 
knowledge: accepted truths are wrong, and yet a people so divided will never 
agree, even on things they can see with their own eyes. Oral tradition might 
seem full in Westeros, but is in fact full of breakages, misinterpretations, and 
lies. To the characte rs who populate the world, there are no incontrovertible 
signifiers: no message or symbol that can be read and understood by everyone 
equally. Not even direct experience can coordinate all those diverse perspectives 
into agreement, let alone oral culture or written culture. 
The narrative structure of A Song of Ice and Fire—each chapter focalized 
by a specific character —gives readers access to experiences that are never 
recorded or shared in the diegetic world, and which are constantly leeching out 
of that world with each death of a POV character. The effect of the narrative  
structure is not only that individual perspective is coded as vital, but that it is 
frustratingly and achingly personal. Information is radically dispersed; 
knowledge is fragmented; those who have experienc ed the same events, but 
experienced them very differently, may be scattered across wide distances, 
never to meet and compare their stories. Ned’s death is emblematic of this 
failure: throughout A Game of Thrones, his chapters have revealed aspects of the 
past while tantalizingly shrouding others, since Ned either refuses or is unable 
to fully revisit Lyanna’s death in his mind. The result is that his death not only 
denies Jon knowledge of his parentage, but denie s the reader truth as well. 
Throughout the bo oks, and especially in prologues and epilogues, we hear 
chapters from characters as they are about to die; each time, an individual truth 
is winked out, whether it belongs to a migraine -ridden lesser scion of House 
Frey or the head of a great house. 13 None of the experiences narrated can be 
contained within the book culture or the oral culture of Westeros: no one 
documents those experiences. As Farah Mendlesohn has argued, “[i]mmersive” 
fantasy is “overwhelmingly concerned with the entropy of the world” (61). In 
the case of A Song of Ice and Fire, what is disappearing is individual experience.  
This is symbolized in A Feast for Crows  by the “hedge septons” who 
wander between remote villages. In the eyes of the faith, they are there to bring 
the light of the Seven to the villagers, not to commit them to book culture: they 
neither census-take, register births, deaths, and marriages, or impose any other 
kind of bureaucracy. Septon Meribald, who accompanies Brienne for a while, is 
illiterate, “but he knew a hundred different prayers and could recite long 
passages from The Seven -Pointed Star  from memor y, which was all that was 
required in the villages” (FfC 414). As the High Sparrow intimates to Cercei, his 
own role as hedge septon was simply to bear witness to those lives; lives now 
lost because of war: “I tended to half a hundred little villages too s mall to have 
a septon of their own. I walked from each one to the next, performing marriages, 
 
13 Merrett Frey is executed by the Brotherhood in the epilogue of A Storm of Swords 2 (542–54). 
Maria Damkjær 
178  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
absolving sinners of their sins, naming newborn children” (FfC 473). 14 Hedge 
septons represent narrative attention to the otherwise unnoticed. It is Meribald 
who articulates one of the most evocative themes in A Feast for Crows, the deep 
damage the war has brought to the common people, by explaining the “broken 
men,” herded off to battles they do not understand and then abandoned (FfC 
420). However, such peripatetic septons are themselves vulnerable, and not all 
of them get to King’s Landing alive, as the High Sparrow did. A dwarf septon is 
murdered because Cercei has offered a price for Tyrion’s head; his killers admit 
that “he said he were a sparrow” while also transparently caring not at all 
whether they got the right man or not, as long as they have a chance of a reward 
(FfC 268). Many readers might not even notice that this is probably the kind 
septon Brienne met in Duskendale earlier in A Feast for Crows, who had been the 
only survivor when his monastery was sacked by sellswords (FfC 154). This loss 
of a single individual is nothing in the grand scheme of the slaughter both 
portrayed and implied in the book, but it points to the destruction of networks 
of knowledge within the kingdom. Every organizing princip le and small 
bureaucracy, even as small as a wandering septon, is in danger. The unnamed 
septon’s death is thus not just an individual loss, but a loss of institutional and 
social knowledge. The books even conjure entire voids of experience, 
symbolized by the silent sisters. A religious order which readies dead bodies for 
burial, the silent sisters take a vow of silence (FfC 520). “ The silent sisters do not 
speak to the living , Catelyn remembered dully, but some say they can speak to the 
dead. And how she envied that . . . ” (CoK 518). Their role in A Song of Ice and Fire 
is to represent the unrepresentable experience; the un-communicated life. They 
are information lacunae in a novel series obsessed with giving voice to 
marginalized information.  
 
TREE LIBRARIES AND LOST EXPERIENCE 
Knowledge is personal, limited, restricted, and essentially 
incommunicable; book culture in Westeros seems irrevocably focused on the far 
past. The result is that the books series is elegiac not for a lost golden age, but 
for the knowledge falling away wit h every destroyed village, holdfast, and 
library and with every life lost. As Carolyn Steedman has pointed out, the 
archive is not memory, and the two must not be confused (68). Metafictionally, 
A Song of Ice and Fire is an exploration of the gap between the two. 
It may seem strange to evoke Westerosi book culture only to argue that 
it is a narrative stand-in for failure; and yet, it is through that failure that we see 
how knowledge is conceptualised in the books. What kinds of knowing, 
learning, and “reading” are valuable in this world? What kind of information 
 
14 For a thematic link to the Franciscan order, see Błaszkiewicz. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  179 
can be trusted? When Bran gains access to the tree network, he sees the past 
through his own eyes, but he has access to what Jojen very explicitly describes 
as a substitute for a library: 
 
“A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies,” said Jojen. “The man 
who never reads lives only once. The singers of the forest had no books. 
No ink, no parchment, no written language. Instead they had the trees, 
and the weirwoods above all. When they died, they went into the wood, 
into leaf and limb and root, and the trees remembered. All their songs 
and spells, their histories and prayers, everything they knew about this 
world. Maesters will tell you that the weirwoods are sacred to the old 
gods. The singers believe they are the old gods. When singers die they 
become part of that godhood.” (DwD1 526) 
 
While the book series is fascinated with the mutability of textual transmission 
and memory, it seems in the fifth book to circumvent textuality in favor of a 
privileged magical individual, “reading” the memories of individual 
consciousnesses of the singers. The trees are repositories, seemingly of the “song 
of earth” (DwD1 203, emphasis in the original). The library is a metaphor only, 
since there is “no ink, no parchment, no written language.” It is a metaphor for 
knowledge of the environment, ecoscientia, which is transspecies in that it both 
incorporates singers, humans, and seemingly plants. Personal experience is 
magically subsumed into the memory of the ea rth, suggesting that the 
environment needs Singers to experience (and die), and humans —Brynden the 
three-eyed raven, and now Bran—to access those experiences. But tree memory 
is not a replacement for book culture: rather, I see it as a metaphor for the 
narrative conventions of the novel, a storytelling genre that records both actions 
and thoughts, even those that characters do not have access to. When a person 
dies, their unique perspective also dies out of the world, and it takes literal 
magic, in the form of a transtemporal tree network, to access a faint afterimage 
of their experiences. 
Meanwhile, the physical books are left to gather dust and mites in 
forgotten libraries; in Martin’s unfinished epic, personal experience is more 
immediate, if also more vulnerable, than book culture. The continual emphasis 
on age, on unreadability, on scro lls as stand -ins for inaccessible knowledge 
adrift in time, seems to set books in stark contrast to first -hand experience. But 
in reality, maybe the message is that books must in fact not be neglected—that 
they only become inadequate when they are not used . Inert books must 
themselves be experienced —read and, crucially, actively interpreted —before 
their contents can have an effect on the world. In Martin’s world, book 
knowledge (or any other knowledge) is only useful if it is instantiated in a 
Maria Damkjær 
180  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
person—it only becomes knowledge when it is acquired —but heartbreakingly, 
the people who come to know the truth are vulnerable and unprotected.  
Fantasy literature has often been accused of being inherently 
conservative (McGarry and Ravipinto). And it is true that much fantasy 
literature is riven with sadness for the loss of ages passed. But I believe this 
article has shown that the feeling of loss  is not inevitably coupled with toxic 
nostalgia for a golden age of balance and benign rule, but rather evoked to work 
through complex questions about how the past perserver es into the present. 
Fantasy book series are notoriously long and fantasy readers are assumed to feel 
positive about the concept of the book, no matter whether they themselves 
consume paperbacks, hardbacks, e -books, or audio. Why then does Martin 
continually evoke the frisson of books destroyed or books ignored? My claim is 
that his book series portrays books as residual objects to work through that 
feeling of loss. Anxieties about decline of knowledge are also anxieties about the 
future, and about the flimsy bulwark a library  forms against entropy. Fantasy 
literature as a genre works wit h the interlacings of past and present, the 
messages left behind by those who are no longer alive, and the decay, garbling, 
and possible manipulation of those messages in impermanent, vulnerable 
material forms.  
 
 
WORKS CITED 
Allan, Alison. “Yorkist Propaganda: Pedigree, Prophecy, and the ‘British History’ in 
the Reign of Edward IV.” Patronage, Pedigree, and Power in Later Medieval 
England, edited by Charles Ross, Allan Sutton, 1979, pp. 171–92. 
Anjirbag, Michelle Anya. “‘Endless Wonder’ for Whom?: Adaptation, 
Transformation, and Magical Libraries.” Adaptation 14.1 (2020), pp. 78–95.  
Battles, Matthew. Library: An Unquiet History. W.W. Norton, 2015.  
Birns, Nicholas. The Literary Role of History in the Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien . Taylor and 
Francis, 2023.  
—. “When You Have Read It, It Will Be Destroyed: The Fugitive Archive In Fantasy 
and Science Fiction.” Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction: A 
Gedenkschrift for David D. Oberhelman, edited by Jason Fisher and Janet Brennan 
Croft, Mythopoeic Press, 2022, pp. 55–66. 
Błaszkiewicz, Maria. “The figure of George R.R. Martin’s Septon Meribald and the 
Franciscan legacy.” Memory and Medievalism in George R.R. Martin and Game of 
Thrones: The Keeper of All our Memories, edited by Carolyne Larrington and Anna 
Czarnowus, Bloomsbury, 2022, pp. 80–91. 
Brljak, Vladimir. “The Books of Lost Tales: Tolkien as Metafictionalist.” Tolkien 
Studies 7, 2010, pp. 1–34.  
Castor, Helen, The Eagle and the Hart: The Tragedy of Richard II and Henry IV, Penguin, 
2024. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  181 
Cowlishaw, Brian. “What Maesters Knew: Narrating Knowing.” Mastering the Game 
of Thrones: Essays on George R.R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire, edited by Jes 
Battis and Susan Johnston, McFarland, 2015, pp. 57–69.  
Croft, Janet Brennan. “Is there an Index to the Prophecies? Or, Finding the Needle in 
the Enchanted Haystack.” Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction: 
A Gedenkschrift for David D. Oberhelman , edited by Jason Fisher and Janet 
Brennan Croft, Mythopoeic Press, 2022, pp. 89–108.  
Devaux, Jean. “From the Court of Hainault to the Court of England: The Example of 
Jean Froissart.” War, Government and Power in Late Medieval France , Liverpool 
UP, 2017, pp. 1–20. 
Di Paolo, Marc. Fire and Snow: Climate Fiction from the Inklings to Game of Thrones . 
SUNY P, 2018. 
Given-Wilson, Chris. Chronicles: The Writing of History in Medieval England . 
Hambledon and London, 2004. 
Grybauskas, Peter. A Sense of Tales Untold: Exploring the Edges of Tolkien’s Literary 
Canvas. The Kent State UP, 2021. 
Guidici, Ciacomo. “By Whisper and Raven: Information and Communication in 
Game of Thrones.” Game of Thrones Versus History: Written in Blood , edited by 
Brian A. Pavlac, John Wiley and Sons, 2017, pp. 227–239. 
Hayot, Eric. “An Introduction.” Information: A Reader , edited by Eric Hayot and 
Anatoly Detwyler, Columbia UP, 2021, pp. 1–14.  
Hunter, Mikayla. “The Citadel and the ivory tower: Academia and education in 
Westeros.” Memory and Medievalism in George R.R. Martin and Game of Thrones: 
The Keeper of All Our Memories , edited by Carolyne Larrington and Anna 
Czarnowus, Bloomsbury, 2022, pp. 37–49.  
Johnston, Susan and Jes Battis. “Introduction: On Knowing Nothing.” Mastering the 
Game of Thrones: Essays on George R.R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire, edited by 
Jess Battis and Susan Johnston, McFarland, 2015, pp. 1–14.  
Johnston, Susan. “Grief Poignant as Joy: Dyscatastrophe and Eucatastrophe in A Song 
of Ice and Fire.” Mythlore vol. 31, no. 1/2, #119/120, 2012, pp. 133–54. 
Larsen, Kristine. “‘Books! Best Weapons in the World’: How Libraries Save the World 
in Popular Culture.” Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction: A 
Gedenkschrift for David D. Oberhelman, edited by Jason Fisher and Janet Brennan 
Croft, Mythopoeic Press, 2022, pp. 43–54.  
Laukkanen, Markus. “Literalizing Hyperobjects: On (mis)Representing Global 
Warming in A Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones.” Fantasy and Myth in the 
Anthropocene: Imagining Futures and Dreaming Hope in Literature and Media , 
edited by Marek Oziewicz, Brian Attebery and Tereza Dědinová, Bloomsbury, 
2022, pp. 235–245. 
Lee, Stuart D. “Manuscripts: Use and Using.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by 
Stuart D. Lee, John Wiley and Sons, 2nd ed., 2022, pp. 48–64.  
Macrae, Andrea. Discourse Deixis in Metafiction: the Language of Metanarration, 
Metalepsis and Disnarration. Routledge, 2019. 
Maria Damkjær 
182  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Martin, George R.R., A Clash of Kings. HarperCollins, 2011.  
—. A Dance with Dragons, 2 volumes, HarperCollins 2012.  
—. A Feast for Crows. HarperCollins, 2011.  
—. Fire and Blood. HarperCollins, 2018.  
—. A Game of Thrones. HarperCollins, 2011.  
—. A Storm of Swords, 2 volumes, HarperCollins, 2011.  
McGarry, Neil and Daniel Ravipinto. “In the Shadow of the Status Quo: The 
Forgotten in The Lord of the Rings and A Song of Ice and Fire.” Fantasy Literature: 
Challenging Genres, edited by Mark A. Fabrizi, Sense, 2016, pp. 13–26. 
McKenzie, D.F. Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. Cambridge UP, 2004.  
Mendlesohn, Farah. The Rhetorics of Fantasy. Wesleyan UP, 2008.  
Nagy, Gergely. “Textuality.” J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical 
Assessment, edited by Michael Drout, Routledge, 2007, pp. 642–43.  
Ong, Walter. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word , 30 th anniversary 
edition, Routledge, 2012.  
Radulescu, Raluca. “Yorkist Propaganda and “The Chronicle from Rollo to Edward 
IV.” Studies in Philology vol. 100, no. 4, 2003, pp. 401–24.  
Ross, Charles. Edward IV. UP of California, 1974. 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in Literature 
and Electronic Media. Johns Hopkins UP, 2001. 
Sangster, Matthew. An Introduction to Fantasy. Cam