
George R.R. Martin Has a Clever Trick To Make ‘House of the Dragon’ Unpredictable for Book Fans
Well played, George R.R. Martin!
By 
Jinal Bhatt
Jun 21st, 2024, 11:06 am 
Save us as a preferred source in Google
Share
Share
Share
Don’t you just love it when you’ve read the book and can lord the knowledge of the plot over those who haven’t? Unfortunately for 
Fire and Blood
 book readers, 
House of the Dragon
 on HBO is still going to surprise (or shock?) you, thanks to George R.R. Martin.
The author of the 
Song of Ice and Fire
 series, which 
Game of Thrones
 and its spinoff are based on, released 
Fire and Blood
 back in 2018, a book that told the history of House Targaryen, as a sort of prequel to his 
ASOIAF
 series. And many of the book readers already know the overarching plots and themes of what will happen in 
House of the Dragon
, which is based on this book.
In fact, even before the promos of 
HOTD
 season 2 episode 1 dropped, book fans were already upping the anticipation for the events of the chapter “Blood and Cheese,” claiming it to rival the despair of the Red Wedding from 
Game of Thrones
. 
However, 
the actual scene went on quite differently than in the book
. While this disappointed some fans who wished the show hadn’t deviated from the books, others were assured that this change had author George R.R. Martin’s blessin, since he is also a creator on the show.
(HBO)
So does this mean the show is going to surprise book fans, too? Well, this definitely happened in 
Game of Thrones
, which deviated quite a bit from the books, of which Martin has yet to finish writing (sigh!) the final two: 
The Winds of Winter
 and 
A Dream of Spring
. So maybe Bran does end up on the Iron Throne in the books too, but how it happens might be different than what we saw in the highly criticized season 8 of the HBO series from David Benioff and D.B. Weiss.
What’s more, this could very well be true for 
House of the Dragon
, too, chiefly because of the built-in unpredictability of the book 
Fire and Blood
.
In 
Fire and Blood
, Martin uses the narrative trope of an unreliable narrator telling the story of what happened during the Dance of the Dragons. It takes the form of a scholarly treatise by one Archmaester Glydayn, who recounts his version of the events of the war between the Blacks and the Greens, as well as citing several other people as sources, such as the court fool Mushroom, Septon Eustace, Grand Maester Orwyle, and Grand Maester Munkun, among others.
Martin, in an interview about 
Fire and Blood 
last year, explained how using unreliable narrators allowed him to incorporate multiple versions of the same events into the story. As a writer, one can be confused which version would be best, but this way, he could have more than one version and leave it to the reader to believe one of them.
The true beauty of how GRRM wrote Fire & Blood is that everyone thinks they know whats going to happen in HOTD… And you don't. And he purposely wrote it like that♥️ 
pic.twitter.com/VdZ3pNc1II
— Mj (@ThisGrayArea) 
June 19, 2024
This means that while 
Fire and Blood
 readers might know roughly what could happen next in the story, which version of the events is finally adapted onscreen in 
House of The Dragon
 is going to be a surprise they’ll only uncover with the rest of the non-readers! 
Furthermore, with Martin on board as a creator, the showrunners could make major changes for cinematic effect while keeping the endgame the same—like they did with this 
one scene where Helaena runs down a corridor
 to Alicent, instead of Alicent being in the room with her already, as was in the book.
Well played, Ser Martin! This unpredictability is going to be fun!
Have a tip we should know? 
[email protected]
Filed Under: 
George R.R. Martin
House of the Dragon
Follow The Mary Sue: 
Jinal Bhatt
Jinal Bhatt (She/Her) is a staff writer for The Mary Sue. An editor, writer, film and culture critic with 7+ years of experience, she writes primarily about entertainment, pop culture trends, and women in film, but she’s got range. Jinal is the former Associate Editor for Hauterrfly, and Senior Features Writer for Mashable India. When not working, she’s fangirling over her favourite films and shows, gushing over fictional men, cruising through her neverending watchlist, trying to finish that book on her bedside, and fighting relentless urges to rewatch Supernatural.
