 
 
 
MYTHLORE  
A JOURNAL OF J.R.R.  TOLKIEN ,  
C.S.  LEWIS , CHARLES WILLIAMS ,  
AND MYTHOPOEIC LITERATURE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
ISSUE 146, VOLUME 43, NUMBER 2 
 SPRING/SUMMER 2025
  

MYT H LO RE 
A JOURNAL OF J. R. R. TOLKIEN, C. S. LEWIS, CHARLES WILLIAMS,  
AND MYTHOPOEIC LITERATURE 
 
MYTHLORE  IS ALSO AVAILABLE AS AN OPEN-ACCESS ELECTRONIC JOURNAL AT 
HTTPS://DC.SWOSU.EDU/MYTHLORE/ 
 
Janet Brennan Croft, Editor 
University of Northern Iowa 
 
Phillip Fitzsimmons, Administrator of Mythlore and Society Archives 
Southwestern Oklahoma State University 
 
 
Editorial Advisory Board
Verlyn Flieger 
University of Maryland,  
College Park (emeritus) 
 
Charles Huttar 
Hope College 
 
Christopher Vaccaro 
University of Vermont 
 
Kris Swank 
Signum University 
 
The Very Rev. John W. 
Houghton 
The Hill School, Pottstown 
(emeritus)  
 
James Prothero 
Independent Scholar 
Douglas A. Anderson 
Independent Scholar 
 
Donna R. White 
Arkansas Tech University 
 
Robin Anne Reid 
Independent Scholar
Mythlore: A Journal of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Charles Williams, and Mythopoeic Literature  (ISSN 0146-9339) is 
a scholarly, peer -reviewed journal devoted to the study of mythopoeic literature and published by the 
Mythopoeic Society (P.O. Box 6707, Altadena, CA 91001 -6707). The Mythopoeic Society is a non -profit 
international literary and educat ional organization for the study, discussion, and enjoyment of fantasy and 
mythic literature, especially the works of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and Charles Will iams. Mythlore issues 
#93/94– are edited by Janet Brennan Croft; issues #85–92 were edited by Ted Sherman; issues #1–84 were edited 
by others . For additional information about Mythlore and the Mythopoeic Society, please visit 
http://www.mythsoc.org.  
 
To subscribe to Mythlore or to purchase back issues, visit the website: http://www.mythsoc.org/store. 
• Paper: USA, 3rd class:  Members, $30/Non-members and institutions, $38 
• Paper: USA, 1st class/Canada, $40/$48; Mexico, $44/$52; Rest of World, $52/$60 
• Electronic: Members, $20/ Non-members, $30 (not available to institutions) 
For print/electronic bundle prices, please see our website. For missing issues, email claims@mythsoc.org. 
 
Cover designed by Janet Brennan Croft. The triskelion design used on the cover and throughout the journal 
 is open source and royalty-free: https://openclipart.org/detail/278014/triskel by roshellin. Unless credited, other decorative 
elements used throughout the journal are also open -source and royalty-free or in the public domain. 
  
Mythlore is a member journal of the Council of Editors of Learned Journals . 
Mythlore is a SHERPA/RoMEO Open Access Green journal.  
 
  
                           Individual contributions are copyright by creators under Creative Commons CC BY-NC-ND:   
                               https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ and published by agreement with Mythlore. 
 
Issue as a whole © 2025 The Mythopoeic Society.  All rights reserved. 
 

M Y T H L O R E 
A JOURNAL OF J.R.R. TOLKIEN, C.S. LEWIS, CHARLES WILLIAMS, AND MYTHOPOEIC LITERATURE 
 
Issue 146                          Volume 43, Number 2                     Spring/Summer 2025 
Editorial 
 Janet Brennan Croft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations of The 
Lord of the Rings  
 Matthew Thompson-Handell. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
 Tom Emanuel . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Eric Reinders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  51 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
 Clinton Manley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 
The Liberty to Bind Oneself: Chesterton and the Oath of Fëanor 
 Matthew McKenna. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Brett Roscoe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in 
Diane Duane’s The Tale of the Five  
Taylor Driggers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .109 
Pandemic Mythmaking: COVID -19 and Mythological Symbolism in Indian 
Folk Art  
 Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf: Rowling’s Beowulfian Allusions, 
Analogues, and Inversions 
Mark-Elliot Finley . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137  
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Maria Damkjær  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism in 
The Lord of the Rings 
Gavin S. Davis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183 
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Laura N. Van Dyke. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201  
 
Notes and Letters. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 215 
Interview with Professor John McKinnell Concerning Tolk ien’s Lectures 
on Beowulf, Łucasz Neubauer 
“Better to Reign in Hell”: Ambivalence and Orcs in the Lay of the Children 
of Húrin, Matthew Thompson-Handell 
St. Jack’s Experim ent House for Juvenile Delinquents: Respondin g to 
Aslan’s Breath by Matthew Dickerson, G. Connor Salter 
Weaving Wikipedia’s Middle-earth Web, Ian F. Alexander 
What Will We Do with the Christmas Pudding?: Joy Davidman, William 
Lindsay Gresham, and “Christmas in the Workhouse,” G. Connor  
Salter and Clark Sheldon 
“Perilous and Fair” in “ A Bleak, Barren Land”: A Feminist Responds to 
Dylan Lee Henderson’s Essay, Robin Anne Reid 
 
Reviews . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 270 
J.R.R. Tolkien: A Very Short Introduction by Matthew Townend, Laura N. Van Dyke 
Tolkien’s Cosmology: Divine Beings and Middle -earth by Sam McBride , Phillip 
Fitzsimmons 
Diary of an Old Soul by George MacD onald, annotated edition , Tiffany Brooke 
Martin 
Mimetic Theory & Middle -earth: Untangling Desire in Tolkien’s Legendarium  by 
Matthew J. Distefano, Curtis Gruenler 
Potterversity: Essays Exploring the World of Harry Potter, edited by Kathryn 
McDaniel and Emily Strand, and The Ivory Tower, Harry Potter, and Beyond: 
More Essays on the Works of J.K. Rowling, edited by Lana Whited, Liam Butchart 
Harry Potter and Resistance by Beth Sutton-Ramspeck, Douglas C. Kane 
Mapping a Sense of Humor: Narrative and Space in Terry Pratchett’s Discworld Novels 
by Daniel Lüthi, Susan M. Moore 
Art and Enchantment: How Wonder Works by Patrick Curry, N. Trevor Brierly 
 
Briefly Noted:  
Harry Potter and the Myth of Millennials: Identity, Reception, and Politics by Priscilla 
Hobbs, Dominic J. Nardi 
Magic, Ma gicians and Detective Fiction: Essays on Intersecting Modes of Mystery, 
edited by Rebecca Josephy, G. Connor Salter 
 
  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  3 
 
 
                     DITORIAL  
                     
 
 
 
ELCOME TO THE SPRING 2025 issue of Mythlore—with a  page count 
within reasonable bounds this time ! A few bits of Mythlore business 
before I introduce the contents.  Dr. Kris Swank, a regular contributor to 
Mythlore, has joined the journal’s board with this issue. We welcome her wide-
ranging expertise on many of the authors you encounter in these pages , as well 
as their sources and inspirations in Celtic, folk, medieval, and Arthurian 
materials. And over the summer, John Rosegrant, also a frequent contributor to 
the journal, will begin assisting with the Reviews column. 
As I move towards retirement from librarianship (but not from editing 
this journal), I would like to spend more time working with students and 
scholars who want to develop their expertise in editing. Please contact me if you 
are interested in a short-tem internship of one or two semesters, or a longer-term 
committtment as editorial assistant. 
While the majority of readers will first encounter Mythlore as individual 
articles on our website or in a library database, I still  enjoy arranging the 
contents of each issue in some sort of logical or thematic progression  which 
rewards the reader willing to start from the beginning and go on to the end. This 
issue is no exception.  The first eight articles concern issues of fantasy and 
theology, some with a global perspective ; taken together, one can see ways in 
which they might be in dialogue with each oth er. The groundwork is first laid 
with Matthew Thompson-Handell’s bibliographic essay on the history of pagan, 
Christian, and blended interpretations of the religious system and values of 
Middle-earth. Tom Emanuel then addresses the sometimes -uncomfortable 
meta-issue of fandom  as a religion, proposing a framework that makes 
theological sense of the custom of visiting Tolkien’s grave.  
Then we move into the a pplication of specific concepts and theories . 
Eric Reinders examines Chinese and Thai  translations of the Ainulindalë, 
drawing interesting parallels with translations of the Christian bible into those 
languages. René Girard’s theory of imitative desire is used by Clinton Manley 
to dissect the Un -man’s strategy in Lewis’s Perelandra. Matthew McKenna 
applies G.K. Chesterton’s ideas about free will and oath -taking to the Oath of 
Fëanor, and Brett Roscoe shows how Lewis depicts the fear of God through his 
descriptions of Aslan. Taylor Driggers  uses the tenets of queer theology to 
illuminate Diane Duane’s The Tale of the Five  series. And Ishani Anwesha Joshi 
W 
Editorial  
4  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
and Sathyaraj Venketasen  discuss an example of the adaptation of 
mythic/religious symbolism in art that responded to the global crisis of COVID-19. 
The remaining four papers address issues of medievalisms in fantasy. 
Mark-Eliot Finley finds echoes of Beowulf in the Harry Potter series. Maria 
Damkjær’s exploration of book culture in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice provokes 
us to think about the fragility of archives more generally  (and joins the 
conversation started in Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction  
(Mythopoeic Press, 2022). Gavin S. Davis looks at how the importance of swords 
in different Middle-earth cultures represents different mediavalisms, and Laura 
N. Van Dyke explores the medieval immersion fantasy in Garner’s Elidor as it 
contrasts, deliberately, with Narnia. 
Our Notes in this issue are a  mixed bag , but all concerned with  the 
Inklings and the Inklings-adjacent. Łucasz Neubaur makes a n addition to the 
resources on Tolkien’s scholarly biography; Matthew Thompson-Handell finds 
a Miltonian parallel for a passage in a version of Túrin’s story. G. Connor Salter 
examines elements of the contes cruel in Lewis. Ian F. Alexander takes us behind 
the scenes of online reference sources on Tolkien, and Salter and Clark Sheldon 
reveal more material from the Wade’s manuscript files on Douglas Gresham and 
Joy Davidman . Finally, Robin Reid provides another thoughtful response to 
Dylan Henderson’s “‘ A Bleak, Barren Land’” (Mythlore #143); good material to 
read before our next Online Midsummer Seminar celebrating the 1 0th 
anniversary of the MythPress essay collection Perilous and Fair. 
 We close, as usual, with an extensive selection  of reviews of books 
about the Inklings, other fantasists, fantasy in general, and a few less -easily-
classified items which may be of interest to Mythlore readers. 
If you would like to keep up with news relating to Mythlore, please 
follow us on Facebook, where we post advance notice of papers accepted for 
upcoming issues, lists of items available for review, and so forth. In addition to 
the members of the Mythlore Editorial Advisory Board, the Mythopoeic Society 
Council of Stewards, and our ever -dependable referees, I’d also like to express 
my continuing gratitude to Phillip Fitzsimmons, University Archivist and 
Special Collections Librarian at Southwestern Oklahoma S tate University 
Libraries and our Administrator for Mythlore and Mythopoeic Society Archives, 
who directs the team adding content to dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/, and to his 
assistant Ben Dressler. My thanks also to David L. Emerson for moral support, 
eagle-eyed proofreading, and keeping the editor optimally caffeinated. As well 
I would like to gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Paul Irwin and Leslie 
Donovan with editing both the contributions themselves and the works cited 
lists to match MLA 9 style. 
 
—Janet Brennan Croft
  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  5 
 
 
                     O RAGNARÖK , NO ARMAGEDDON :  
                         PAGAN AND CHRISTIAN INTERPRETATIONS  
                                   OF THE LORD OF THE RINGS  
 
                                  MATTHEW THOMPSON -HANDELL  
 
 
N HER 2014 ARTICLE “BUT WHAT DID HE REALLY MEAN?,” Verlyn Flieger refers 
to conflicting interpretations of The Lord of the Rings, citing by way of example 
the appeal of the work to neo -pagans (“an alternative to the dreary realism of 
mainstream culture”) and to Christians (“an evangelical message in its imagery 
of stars and light and bread and sacrifice”) (149). Flieger argues that such 
conflicting interpret ations are a result, at least in part, of ambiguous and 
contradictory statements by Tolkien, statements which are indicative of 
unresolved conflicts within the man himself. One of the three topics examined 
by Flieger, as she develops her argument, is the question of intentional 
Christianity in Tolkien’s fiction. The focus here is on The Lord of the Rings , and 
Flieger looks at a range of statements by Tolkien which are anywhere from 
inconsistent to incompatible with each other. Examined particularly closely are 
Tolkien’s words to Robert Murray, to whom he wrote that The Lord of the Rings 
was “a fundamentally religious and Catholic work; unconsciously so at first, but 
consciously in the revision.” However, Tolkien goes on to speak of his deliberate 
omission of overtly religious elements. Flieger suggests that such ambiguity has 
led to the same statement being used to support contradictory positions: Joseph 
Pearce saying that The Lord of the Rings  is “theologically orthodox” and Patrick 
Curry that the work has a blend of “Christian, pagan, and humanist 
ingredients.” Flieger then highlights the incongruity between Tolkien telling 
Murray about conscious revision of his work and then (a year later) telling W.H. 
Auden that there was “very little […] conscious […] intention in mind at any 
point” (150–2). Looking closely at these, and other statements, Flieger describes 
Tolkien’s “yes-but-not-yes tactics” as a means of responding to a wide range of 
readers without upsetting any of them (153 –4). This is however more than just 
people-pleasing—the fact that Tolkien “trimmed his sails to meet winds from 
different directions” reveals “a deep ambivalence in the man that produced a 
creative tension in his fiction” (162). 
Flieger revisited this theme in “The Arch and the Keystone” (her Guest 
of Honor address at Mythcon 50 in 2019), though with a subtle, but significant 
shift in the argument. In the earlier “But What Did He Really Mean?,” ambiguity 
and contradiction in Tolki en’s own statements are linked to two distinct 
I 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
6  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
consequences: a creative tension in his fiction, and conflicting interpretations of 
his work. In “The Arch and the Keystone,” these two consequences are more 
explicitly connected to each other, and tension appears somewhat eclipsed by 
opposition: the contradictions in Tolkien the man result in contradictions in his 
work, which in turn contribute to contradictory interpretations of such work. Or 
as Flieger notes in her concluding remarks: “what they [scholars and critics] see 
is there, even when they’re seei ng contradictory things” (16). Amongst the 
numerous and varied labels that have been put on the man and his work, Flieger 
notes the pairing of “a Christian apologist and a pagan” (6), revisiting the 
opposition between Christian and neo -pagan interpretation s with which she 
opened her earlier 2014 article. She later observes that the fragmentation and 
polarization in Tolkien studies is in part a consequence of the fact that “so much 
of the primary evidence —that is to say, [Tolkien’s] writing —seems to toggle 
between diametrically opposite positions” (6–7). In The Lord of the Rings, Flieger 
identifies this opposition in the tragedy that befalls Frodo—that the hero fails in 
his appointed task only for Gollum to save the day; and that Frodo can save the 
Shire, but not for himself: “Frodo and Sam, at the Cracks of Doom and in the 
aftermath, embody between them the final tension and opposition that 
characterizes Tolkien’s masterwork” (13 –4). Here there is another subtle shift 
from the earlier 2014 article, where ambiguity (rather than contradiction) had a 
more significant role to play: Flieger observes a conflict between faith and 
imagination which gives The Lord of the Rings “a power and tension […] whose 
virtue is its indeterminacy.” Several examples are given, rounded off with 
Gandalf—or was it Saruman? —appearing to Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli: “for 
the Three Hunters the mystery is unsolved, and it seems clear that ambiguity is 
what Tolkien intended” (“But What” 164). 
Scholars and critics 1 have indeed been identifying both Christan and 
pagan (or non-Christian) elements in The Lord of the Rings  since its publication. 
What follows will look at the critical output up to 1981 (more on this date in a 
moment), in order to show that the presence and interaction of Christian and 
pagan elements is indicative of ambiguity rather than contradiction, and 
consequently that any opposition between Christian and pagan views is 
grounded to a greater extent in the perspectives of individual critics than in any 
contradiction within the work itself. In order to identify the critical responses 
that gave particular consideration to questions of Christianity and paganism, I 
went through the revised edition of Richard West’s annotated bibliography of 
Tolkien criticism (which covers the period to 1981) and noted those items where, 
in the title or in West’s annotation, the word “Christian” or “pagan” appears (or 
related terms such as “Christianity” or “paganism”). Further items were noted 
 
1 For the remainder of this article, I will use the term “critics”. 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  7 
where a particular word indicated some treatment of these themes. 2 
Additionally, three book -length studies were considered in view of their 
treatment (albeit relatively brief) of Christianity and paganism in The Lord of the 
Rings. The total number of critical responses examined was 32. 3  In terms of the 
period covered, 1981 is the end date not only because that is as far as West’s 
bibliography goes. It is also the year in which The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien was first 
published, being thus a watershed after which many of Tolkien’s own 
statements would have become widely available to critics for the first time. 
Before this, there will have been less opportunity for critical responses to The 
Lord of the Rings to have been influenced by such statements.4 
I have divided the critical responses considered here into three groups: 
those which are more concerned with pagan (or non-Christian) elements in The 
Lord of the Rings; those which are more concerned with Christian elements; and 
those which consider a marriage of the two within the work. 5 Pagan views 
highlighted elegiac qualities, the sense of loss and of defeat. Other non-Christian 
views described a world in which the will and the actions of individuals play 
their part against the backdrop of a higher power, and also considered how the 
work reflects archetypal human myths. What connects many of these views is 
their recognition that overt Christianity is absent from The Lord of the Rings, and 
in this absence is an ambiguity concerning the theology of Middle -earth. Seen 
alongside the Christian views, this ambiguity comes into even sharper focus. 
The higher power may be seen as Providence, the struggle between good and 
evil may be character istically Christian, and the heroes can be Christ -like 
 
2 While this approach does not guarantee that every critical response with something to 
say about Christianity or paganism will have been considered, I suggest that it does 
provide sufficient coverage for reliable conclusions to be drawn. Aside from “Christian” 
or “pagan,” the other keywords were: Beowulf, God, Providence, religious, and theological. 
3 There were in fact four critical responses that were identified but which, on review, did 
not provide material that was sufficiently relevant to my topic, treating Christian or pagan 
elements in The Lord of the Rings  only very briefly. Using the references in West’s 
Bibliography, these were: II–80, II–437, II–547, and II–652. 
4 This does not mean that Tolkien’s own statements would have been entirely unknown to 
critics. The interview with Henry Resnik in 1966 which Flieger considers in “But What Did 
He Really Mean” and in “The Arch and the Keystone” appeared in the Saturday Evening 
Post, with a lengthier transcript appearing in Niekas 18 in 1967. Also, Tolkien’s letter to 
Father Robert Murray in 1953, which is also considered in both of Flieger’s articles, was 
extensively quoted in a piece by Murray himself which was published on 15 September 
1973 (shortly after Tolkien’s death) in the pe riodical The Tablet. At least one of the critics 
considered in my article was aware of that source—William Dowie, who quoted from it at length. 
5 This is by no means a clear -cut division. There are borderline cases which might have 
been placed in a different group, though in my view the division is a sound one, and 
supports a structured approach. 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
8  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
figures. It is not a series of contradictions in the work that give rise to these 
competing views—it is the ambiguity that leaves the (critical) field wide open 
for interpretation. Turning to critics who acknowledged and examined the 
combination of pagan and Christian elements, they observed the elegiac tone of 
the former interacting with the moral and ethical themes of the latter, and with 
an optimistic view of good triumphing over evil. Some saw a tension and even 
an opposition between these two sides, wh ere the conflict was primarily 
identified as one of tone. Questions of tone are less clear -cut—perhaps more 
ambiguous—than those of (say) theology or doctrine, and a blending of elegiac 
and joyful tone does not of itself represent a contradiction between a pagan and 
a Christian view of the world. What all of this suggests is that it is ambiguity 
rather than contradiction that leads critics to take such opposing views on this point. 
 
PAGAN (AND NON-CHRISTIAN) VIEWS 
In the period up to 1981, there were relatively few critical responses to 
The Lord of the Rings that focused solely on a pagan interpretation. The first such 
response came early, with Douglass Parker’s article that appeared in the Winter 
1956/57 issue of The Hudson Review. Parker is definitve—in his view, The Lord of 
the Rings is a pagan work, a recreation of Beowulf as Tolkien understood it, where 
“the unknown West Saxon” wrote of a world where Fate “has not yet wholly 
become a Christian god” and governs the universe in an impersonal way. Parker 
felt that Tolkien had “toiled well and successfully after his paradigm” and had 
created a story where humans and their endeavours are confronted by evil and 
are doomed to be lost, to fade, perish, or die. In the face of all this, the only valid 
response—and one which demonstrates the heroism in the work —is to face up 
to this tragedy of the human condition. This gives The Lord of the Rings a meaning 
which Parker calls “heroic -elegiac.” Parker acknowledges the possibil ity of a 
Christian view of the work only in order to deny it—he feels that the promise of 
immortality (for elves and a few hobbits) is not sufficient to treat the work as 
anything other than pagan (608–9). 
Over a decade later, two articles appeared in 1969 which both took a 
pagan view, though from rather different perspectives. Nan Braude compares 
the differing mythopoeic approaches of Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and Charles 
Williams. On Tolkien, she says that his materials are “traditional archetypes” 
and that the foremost literary sources are Teutonic and Celtic myth (6). Of most 
interest however, is the contrast drawn with the overt Christian elements in 
Lewis and Williams, where Braude observes that “The Lord of the Rings is ‘pagan’ 
in the sense that it is to be read only in terms of itself: it does not point outwards 
to a greater reality, thus admitting its own insufficient reality” (7). Compared to 
the heroic -elegiac qualities described by Parker, this is a rather differ ent 
understanding of what it means for a work of literature to be pagan. This serves 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  9 
as a useful reminder that the term “pagan” (and the term “Christian”) can mean 
different things to different people —here it might be more appropriate to 
consider Braude’s view as “non-Christian,” especially in view of the reason for 
her distinction between  Tolkien on the one hand, and Lewis and Williams on 
the other.  
The other article that appeared in 1969 was by Charles Moorman 
(”Now Entertain Conjecture of a Time”). He takes a similar view to Parker, 
though expands the analysis. Middle -earth is “essentially pagan in 
conception”—a world where “heroic patterns may evolve.” Moorman adds that 
“Middle-earth, or at least certain portions of it, is the stark, basically pessimistic 
world of the sagas in which God does not intervene in human conflicts and in 
which the hero’s or the society’s struggle against evil culminates at  best in a 
temporary victory achieved at tremendous cost” (62). He also observes pagan 
qualities both at the level of the individual (heroes such as Frodo paying “a high 
cost for victory”) and at the level of civilizations—with no hearkening back to a 
golden age (unlike in Narnia), and with outposts of light surrounded by 
darkness, which Moorman recognises as a theme from pagan heroic literature 
in the Western tradition (64 –66). It is worth noting however a subtle difference 
between Moorman’s pagan interpre tation and that of Parker —while the latter 
identified some meaning and value in the human struggle against inevitable loss 
and failure, the former suggests a more pessimistic and fatalistic tone: “evil must 
be combatted simply because it is a part of the h eroic code to do so” (63). In 
terms of the possibility of a Christian interpretation, Moorman shuts the door 
on this, saying that the work “is in no way theological either in its structure or 
in its thematic pattern” (and note the implication that paganism  cannot have a 
theology) (62). Just as Braude did, he contrasts Middle -earth with Narnia, 
primarily in terms of tone, so that the former is “bittersweet” with “no undiluted 
joy, no pure eucatastrophe” (68). He observes an opposition between Christian 
and heroic values, where forgiveness is incompatible with vendetta, and where 
the Christian view is “unflaggingly optimistic” (62). 
Several critics identified in The Lord of the Rings a religious scheme, but 
one which is not explicitly pagan nor Christian. Their views indicate a way of 
looking at the ethical or spiritual value of the work without any doctrinal 
associations. The first of these critics was Patricia Meyer Spacks, whose 19 59 
article examined the work’s moral and theological scheme, noting that “for this 
scheme, there are no explicit supernatural sanctions: The Lord of the Rings  is by 
no means a Christian work” (30). Spacks appears to take the same approach as 
both Parker and Braude —if a work displays no overt Christianity, it is not a 
Christian work. Spacks adds that religious practices are not apparent —nor is 
there an evident deity: “a clear ethos rules the virtuous, but it s derivation is 
unclear.” That ethos is exemplified by the hobbits, by their virtues —loyalty, 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
10  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
cheerfulness in adversity, persistence, honesty, humility, and most of all, “naked 
will and courage” (quoting here from Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics) (31). 
Spacks sees in the destruction of the Ring, in spite of Frodo’s failure at the Cracks 
of Doom, a triumph of Fate —though not the impersonal wyrd of the pagan 
tradition—over the human failure of the will (34). As will be seen below, critics 
who took a Christian view could make the very same point about the human 
will, with Christian Providence taking the place of Fate. Although Spacks takes 
no firm position on the doctrine of the work, she does still identify elements 
which she characterises as pagan or Christian: the ethos which she has described 
above is closest to a pagan ethos, where Frodo rema ins steadfast in the face of 
overwhelming opposition (33); and the theological scheme of Middle -earth has 
Christian parallels, with “the possibility of a sort of Grace” (34) and where “the 
result of repeated choices of good is the spiritual growth of the chooser” (37).  
Ten years after Spacks, Gracia Fay Ellwood would cover similar 
ground in a 1969 article whose main thrust was the treatment of good and evil 
in The Lord of the Rings . She considered archetypes and the universality of hero 
myths in human societies, as well as religious aspects and functions of such 
myths, without focusing on any particular doctrine or religion. Ellwood 
observes that in Tolkien’s work “there is no god visible beyond a hazy reference 
in an appendix to ‘the One,’ but the drawing power of the Ut termost West, the 
suggestion that Frodo was ‘meant’ to find the Ring, the preservation of Gollum, 
all show providential planning at work” (“Good Guys” 11). Ellwood makes no 
claim that such planning is the work of a Christian God —and indeed she 
includes a footnote (when making the observation quoted above) that refers to 
Spacks’s 1959 article. 
Two further critics also saw in The Lord of the Rings elements that were 
religious in character without necessarily being Christian. In 1970, Bruce A. 
Beatie sought to explain the underlying reasons for what he dubs the “Tolkien 
phenomenon,” observing that the work has a mythical structure which speaks 
to something religious but which is rooted more deeply in the human condition 
than any one particular religion or dogma. He refers to the work of 
“archaeologist-historian” Gertrude Rachel Levy as having ident ified “the 
continuity of both symbolism and structures of religious thought, though the 
function and context of those symbols and structures change, from the Stone 
Age to the golden age of Athens.” Beatie adds that Levy would recognise the 
same structures in The Lord of the Rings  (698). The Quest -myth in the work 
implies an ordered universe where the choices of an individual can have lasting 
significance. Such choices have as a backdrop “Fate, or God, or Augustinian 
predestination.” Although he allows for these contrasting backdro ps, and is 
more concerned with  concepts that are free of any particular doctrine, Beatie 
does say—though merely in parentheses—that the work “is basically Christian, 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  11 
in spite of the lack of overt symbols” (699). Providing no further analysis on this 
point, one is left with the impression that any such identification is, for him, 
secondary to the mythical significance he describes.  
In 1974, William Dowie’s article (which was reprinted with revsions in 
1979) also looked at religious, non -Christian characteristics of The Lord of the 
Rings. He noted that “the religiosity of Tolkien’s trilogy is neither 
conceptualized nor dogmatized within the story. Yet the sense of the sacred is 
present in blood and symbol and theme. It is the unvocalized religion of man in 
touch with nature and the cosmos” (266–67). Dowie’s analysis, which forms the 
first half of his article, draws a number of parallel s between the text, and 
concepts or themes in Mircea Eliade’s The Sacred and the Profane. In introducing 
this analysis, Dowie says that “the disagreement over whether Tolkien’s 
eschatology is guided more by Christian or by Norse ideology misses the point 
that Tolkien plunges into the sacrality of the natural” (267). This argument is 
however r ather weakened by the second half of the article, where Dowie 
identifies in the work certain Christian (but not pagan) moral and intellectual 
themes, which he also obse rves are present “in a context that has no explicit 
trappings of religion.” Dowie suggests that this obfuscation of overt Christianity 
has a purpose —a way of “unobtrusively exploring the sacred” that “allows a 
fresh emotional contact with ideas that might otherwise be categorically 
prejudged.” As will be seen below, this is a similar observation to those made 
by some other critics who have seen in The Lord of the Rings a pagan vehicle for 
delivering a Christian message—Dowie in fact cites one of these critics, Gunnar 
Urang, who had referred to the technique as “repaganizing” (274–75). 
Some key themes emerge from these pagan and non -Christian views. 
The identification of The Lord of the Rings  as pagan was (for Parker and 
Moorman, if not for Braude) a consequence of a tone which is heroic -elegiac, 
pessimistic, where human actions and achievements will ultimately be defeated 
by opposing forces. Other critics saw religious aspects which were not 
necessarily Christian—in particular, that the will and the actions of indiv iduals 
are part of a universe which is influenced, ordered or directed by  a higher 
power; and that there are structures and themes that speak to myths and 
archetypes that run “deeper” than organised religion. One important point 
relates not to something that was present, but something that was absent—many 
of these critics noted  the absence of overt signs of Christianity. What is 
particularly interesting is that this same observation could lead to directly 
opposing conclusions. For Parker, Braude, Moorman and Spacks, The Lord of the 
Rings is pagan or non -Christian, in part because of this absence. For Beatie and 
Dowie, the work is Christian (at least in part), in spite of  this absence. These 
competing views are possible because the lack of overt Christianity results in a 
Middle-earth that is ambiguous, at least in theological terms. 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
12  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
CHRISTIAN VIEWS  
During the period to 1981, critical responses to The Lord of the Rings that 
focused on Christian elements in the work were more common than those that 
took a pagan or non-Christian view. While seven articles were considered in the 
previous section, sixteen will be considered here. These present a wide range of 
themes, characteristics and parallels which the critics identified as Christian. 
Edmund Fuller wrote about Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings  in Books 
With Men Behind Them , first published in 1962 (his chapter on Tolkien was 
revised and reprinted in Isaacs and Zimbardo’s Tolkien and the Critics  in 1968). 
Fuller observes that “In this story there is no overt theology or religion. There is 
no mention of God. No one is worshipped.” He qualifies this by acknowledging 
that a “limited eschatology” is implied, though he does not say that it is a 
Christian one (29). All of that said, Fuller proc eeds to focus on the Christian 
context of the work, by citing an aspect of the Christian tradition, before 
describing its equivalent in Middle -earth. Here he considers both the presence 
of a divine power that intervenes in the affairs of the world; and the interaction 
between Providence and free will (together with the importance of taking 
action) (29–30). Fuller also suggests that Gandalf and Frodo may be seen “not as 
Christ equivalents, but as partial anticipations of the Christ,” noting Frodo’s 
heavy burden and Gandalf’s resurrection, as well as the latter’s temptation to 
wield the Ring (35). 
Two papers presented at the Tolkien conference that took place at 
Mankato State College in October 1966 gave particular consideration to 
Christian themes. Dorothy K. Barber examines the meaning of The Lord of the 
Rings through, amongst other things, the use of primary world figurative 
language as literal in the secondary world —looking for example at the 
association of light with God. Barber’s conclusion identifies the destruction of 
the Ring as divinely ordained: “This climactic scene affirms the evangelium: 
Providence, or Good, or God, does exist and act in the affairs of Middle-earth in 
the continuing struggle against Evil” (49). In his conference paper (whose focus 
is heroism), Alexis Levitin observes that there is a Christian theme in Frodo’s 
failure: “Human weakness is an everpresent theme in Christian literature, and 
even the heroes do not completely escape its effect.” He adds that “Frodo, 
having carried the Ring, beyond all expectations, to the brink of destruction, 
cannot put the seal to all his prev ious acts. The implication seems to be that no 
fallen man could have done so” (32). This triumph of Providence over the failure 
of the will is the same point made by Spacks (noted above) though with Fate 
taking the place of Providence. One further point made by Levitin concerns the 
difference between a pagan and a Christian concept of endurance against the 
odds: “The Norse hero fights on in the face of defeat for the sake of fame, which 
he hopes will survive him. Frodo and Sam persevere out of duty alone” ( 33). 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  13 
However, this particular distinction seems open to debate —Charles Moorman, 
in a 1972 article which will be considered further below, quoted E.V. Gordon on 
the pagan heroic view of the universe, with an emphasis more on courage than 
on fame: “the hero resis ted to the end, and won satisfaction from fate, in being 
master of his life while he had it. [...] He might win the struggle, or he might 
know that it was hopeless; but it was better to die resisting than to live basely” 
(qtd. in Moorman, “Heroism” 30). 
In a 1966 article, Donald Reinken looked with a Christian perspective 
at the philosophical and political relevance of Tolkien’s work for the modern 
world. He argues that the plot turns on the workings of Providence, where 
Frodo’s virtues are insufficient t o complete the task on their own account. In 
accepting the “insufficient, finite good” and the “vainly rebellious evil” of 
earthly creatures, Providence “achieves good beyond human power or 
foretelling.” Reinken notes the absence in The Lord of the Rings  of religious 
practices or references to God—but says that in spite of this, the apparent divine 
ordering of the world demonstrates that the work is “a powerful testimony” to 
God. He also goes on to suggest that the absence of overt Christianity is a 
deliberate means of conveying a Christian message without seeming to do so, 
the work being addressed to a secular age, which can be led “from a vulgar 
irreligion to God” (9). As noted above, Dowie would make the same observation 
in his 1974 article. 
In a review essay for The New York Review of Books  in 1967, Matthew 
Hodgart considered a range of topics, including some brief commentary on 
Christian elements. Tolkien is, with The Lord of the Rings, conveying a Christian 
message: “isn’t the book really a parable, consciously aimed at putting across 
the general Christian view that the universe is a battlefield between the forces 
of good and evil?” He then describes Frodo as a Christ -like figure, beca use of 
his suffering, and his sacrifice which saves the S hire, not to mention being 
“stripped of his garments, flogged by the soldiery, scratched by thorns.” It is 
worth noting that Hodgart is roundly critical of such a (perceived) aim of the 
work—conveying a message which he sees as “infantile” (11).  
In a 1968 article on religious aspects of The Lord of the Rings , Sandra 
Miesel observes that “the remoteness and silence of Tolkien’s unworshipped 
One is typical of primitive theology,” but at the same time she maintains that 
“while the cultural framework is religionless, the attitudes expressed within it 
are traditio nal Christian ones” (210). Miesel says that the work presents an 
Augustinian view of good and evil (with the latter being a perversion of the 
former); that humility is a hallmark of the good and is opposed by arrogance; 
and that Frodo is a Christ figure who “willingly dies to the joy of living” (210–11). 
Paul Pfotenhauer in his 1969 article lays out several Christian themes, 
the principal one concerning Providence. He quotes the familiar words of 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
14  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Gandalf (“Bilbo was meant to find the Ring”) and Elrond (“the purpose for which 
you are called hither”) and says that “in all these events Tolkien is saying that 
events are finally shaped by a Power that remains unseen, goes almost 
unnoticed, and sometimes uses the most unlikely p ersons as His agents” (13 –
14). Pfotenhauer makes the point however that this does not deny free will —
indeed claiming that The Lord of the Rings  is amongst the best commentaries he 
has read on Augustine’s view that predestination an d free will are two sides of 
the same coin (14). Two further Christian elements treated rather more briefly 
are temptation (to use the Ring) (14); and self -sacrifice (“Gandalf, Aragorn, 
Frodo, and Sam, are each in their own way Christ figures”) (14). 
Catherine Stimpson’s booklet on Tolkien, in the series Columbia Essays 
on Modern Writers , appeared in 1969 and levelled criticism (at times harsh) at 
many aspects of Tolkien’s output. In this, there are some brief references to 
Christian elements in The Lord of the Rings. Gandalf and Frodo are seen as Christ-
like figures—the former experiences “Christlike suffering” which “shows most 
clearly Tolkien’s growing religious concern and use of obvious Christian 
parallels” (34), and Sam is described as “a faithful Peter to Frodo’s Christ” (38). 
Stimpson also equates the Uttermost West with a Christian afterlife: “though the 
lands the boats of Círdan seek are heathen in name, they signify the Christian 
concept of redemption” (40–41).  
One further article from 1969 appeared in the collection Shadows of 
Imagination (on Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and Charles Williams). Although his article 
has a wider scope, Gunnar Urang identified two particular qualities which 
demonstrate a Christian theme in The Lord of the Rings . One is a providential 
design, apparent in the “sense of the interrelatedness of all the elements in this 
‘history’ and of an ordering of all these elements to one end” (103 –104). The 
other is an eschatology which is essentially bibli cal: “What the hobbits have 
become enmeshed in is a decisive struggle of cosmic scope. This is, of course, 
the imagery of biblical eschatology; the end is not an apex, but a crisis” (105). 
Urang shows conviction in his Christian view, though he also introd uces a 
pagan perspective, referring to Tolkien’s 1936 lecture on Beowulf. He quotes him 
on how the poet knew “both the newer Christian poetry and the older heroic 
verse and could contemplate the new faith and learning and the native tradition 
together.” Urang then cites Tolkien’s observation on the language of the poet: 
“partly ‘re-paganized’ by the author with a special purpose.” This brings Urang 
to his point —The Lord of the Rings  is also re -paganized, and with a special 
purpose: “Tolkien is at once committed to certain insights of traditional 
Christian belief and aware of the modern man’s scepticism about many of those 
insights. Therefore, ‘re -paganization’” (106). Here then is a view of Tolkien’s 
work as a Trojan horse for the Christian faith, a view exp ressed by Reinken in 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  15 
1966 and which Dowie would repeat in 1974 (quoting Urang’s use of the term 
“re-paganization”).6 
Gracia Fay Ellwood in her 1970 monograph Good News from Tolkien’s 
Middle-earth examines the concept of the hero, but more particularly the figures 
who can be seen as Christ-like. Her analysis is more detailed than the references 
to Christ-like figures made up to this point by other critics. Ellwood observes 
that “Gandalf is essentia lly a type -hero; he resembles Christ largely insofar as 
Christ is also a type -hero who fights the evil one, dies, and returns to life. The 
other two [Frodo and Aragorn] are type -heroes as well, but have much more 
definite resemblances to the specific figure of Jesus” (104). Gandalf is said to be 
Christ-like chiefly because of his fight with the Balrog, the associated descent 
into an abyss, and his eventual resurrection (much close  biblical analysis is 
provided) (113 –18). Other resemblances, such as the healing of Théoden, the 
flood of the Bruinen, and resisting the temptation to use the Ring, are “too vague 
to be convincing” (113). Frodo’s position as a Christ -like figure is closer  to the 
human figure of Jesus because of his down -to-earth nature, and his love of 
physical pleasures, providing the backdrop and contrast to the privations he 
suffers on his journey (121–22). There are also resemblances to the Passion—the 
betrayal by Gollum at Cirith Ungol, Frodo stripped and beaten by the orcs, 
falling into thorns, suffering from a terrible thirst, “but above all, the crushing 
weight of the symbol of Evil, increasing as it nears the centre of the hell where it 
originated” (125–26). Aragorn is then considered (“an image of Christ the King”) 
where the parallels include a royal lineage touched by prophecy, great feats of 
prowess (such as the descent into and emergence from the Paths of the Dead), 
and the glory of the events of the Field of Cormallen (134–41).  
In a 1971 article, Willis B. Glover considers the Christian character of 
Middle-earth. He acknowledges that “Middle Earth in the Third Age is depicted 
without religion” and that the only mention of God is to be found in the 
reference to “the One” in Append ix A to The Lord of the Rings . Glover argues 
however that Middle-earth is—in a sense—a Christian world, since Tolkien was 
a Christian. He also notes that “it is monotheistic in the peculiar sense of the 
Biblical tradition” (3). Glover then identifies a ran ge of elements to support his 
argument. First, Middle-earth is a non-dualistic world where evil is a corruption 
of good (“the Biblical world of the good creation”) (3). Second, Providence is 
directed by a transcendent power, while still allowing for free w ill (5). Third, 
 
6 These views on a covert message in The Lord of the Rings are also reminiscent of what C.S. 
Lewis said in a 1956 article in The New York Times, on the subject of fairy-stories as a vehicle 
for a Christian message: “But supposing that by casting all these things into an imaginary 
world, stripping them of their stained -glass and Sunday school associations, one could 
make them for the first time ap pear in their real potency? Could one not thus steal past 
those watchful dragons? I thought one could.” 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
16  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
there is a Biblical structure to history in the sense of being non -cyclical (unlike 
the pagan view where “the pattern eternally recurs”)—and which can transcend 
and even control nature itself (5 –6). Finally there are some brief concluding 
remarks on elements of Christian ethics such as forgiveness and redemption 
(citing Boromir), and pity (citing Gollum) (8). Perhaps the most striking point 
made by Glover is his suggestion that a monotheistic world with no mention of 
God, but where there is an awareness of an outside agency, is a concept 
“peculiar to the Biblical tradition and traditions deriving in considerable 
measure out of it including modern non-Christian humanism.” This association 
between a Biblical tradition and humanism lies in the latter’s search for meaning 
in a world where faith in God has waned and where atheism finds no meaning. 
Here Glover finds a reason for the appeal of Tolkien’s work: “it satisfies 
vicariously a nostalgia for a more meaningful world wit hout making any 
demands of faith or change in belief” (5). 
Clyde S. Kilby contributed a chapter to the 1974 collection Myth, 
Allegory and Gospel which examined Tolkien’s work as well as that of C.S. Lewis, 
Charles Williams, and G.K. Chesterton. Kilby’s chapter, on mythic and Christian 
elements in Tolkien, surveys a wide range of Christian elements and themes. He 
identifies the struggle between goo d and evil, reflected in the dichotomies of 
light and dark, and white and black (“one of the most obvious Christian 
intimations”) (129). He observes the directing power of  Providence—and 
addressing the oft-heard argument that Lewis’s work is more overtly Christian, 
Kilby argues that Tolkien’s position here is not so different from Lewis’s—“one 
finds frequent parallels in which the veil is hardly less transparent in Tolkien’ s 
story,” before adding that “in both a sovereign Good is constantly and 
consistently operative” (132). Kilby also notes the presence of Christ -like 
figures—Gandalf’s fall and resurrection, and Frodo’s suffering and struggle 
through Mordor (133 –34). He ide ntifies the qualities of pity, mercy and 
redemption demonstrated by certain characters, exemplified by the case of 
Frodo and Gollum, though also citing the fact of Frodo contemplating the 
possibility of redemption for Saruman (137). One final theme is the exercise of 
the will, as demonstrated by Frodo’s continued efforts, especially through 
Mordor: “the element of will in the Tolkien story rises above that of simple 
Stoicism and takes on something at least of a Christian color,” adding that “Saint 
Augustine’s doctrine of the effective will is well illustrated by Frodo” (138–39). 
In a 1975 article, Cheryl Forbes argues that the tension between free 
will and Providence is one of the most compelling themes in The Lord of the Rings. 
There is siginifance in the need for characters to make choices —between the 
right way and the wrong way —and where the right choice is often unclear. 
Temptation and its interaction with the will is also considered, exemplified by 
Frodo’s relationship with the Ring: “The hobbit wants to resist the ring while he 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  17 
longs to yield to it. In yielding to temptation he acts what he does not will; in 
this Tolkien captures the struggle of every Christian” (11). Forbes adds that 
Frodo’s inability to cast the Ring into the fire demonstrates “the futility of 
trusting in free will” and that Providence achieves its aims as “the quest is 
accomplished regardless of Frodo’s choice” (12). This view of the inadequacy of 
the will is similar to that expressed earlier by both Spacks and Levitin.  
Of the three remaining articles, two make relatively narrow points in 
relation to Christian themes, whereas the other takes a very broad sweep. 
George Boswell’s 1972 article (only considered now as the Christian point is a 
brief one) examines the “intentio ns, materials, methods, themes, and 
achievement” of The Lord of the Rings  (188). The one observation on Christian 
themes argues that the concept of vicarious sacrifice is “the central 
communication of the entire work,” exemplified by Frodo saving the Shire  for 
others but not for himself (197). James Lynch trod a less well -beaten path with 
his 1978 article, which concerns how parties, feasts and banquets represent “a 
highly concrete pattern which indicates how Tolkien’s Christianity informs his 
thought” (13). Two particular events are associated with Christian parallels: the 
feast given by Elrond at Rivendell has a particularly spiritual quality in so far as 
it is nourishing, in spite of the fact that “the food there is never described”; and 
the lembas gifted by Galadriel “is Tolkien’s clearest description of magical, holy 
food. Here he comes closest to making an analogy between the meal and the 
Eucharistic feast” (14). Finally, Bruce Palmer’s 1976 monograph presents a wide 
sweep of Christian parallels. These include the Uttermost West (inhabited by the 
Valar) representing an afterlife (8 –9); the invocation of Elbereth, in a way 
reminiscent of invocations of the Virgin Mary, when the hobbits meet Gildor 
early in their jour ney; at the same meeting, the food and drink that is shared 
having a sacred and spiritual power (15–16); the phial of Galadriel containing a 
holy power of light, and the earth given to Sam representing something of an 
Edenic garden (21 –22); the blessing given when Faramir and his companions 
eat, being reminiscent of saying grace before a meal (23); the sacrifice of Frodo 
to save the Shire (26 –27); and the glory present in the events of the Field of 
Cormallen (25–26).  
Several recurring themes emerge from this review of Christian 
interpretations of The Lord of the Rings . Foremost is that of Providence, the 
guiding hand of a higher power, interested in the affairs of Middle -earth and 
working behind the scenes to ensure the success of good against evil. Critics did 
not however see in this a deterministic universe—they identified the importance 
of the free will exercised by the characters and sought to understand this in the 
context of Providence. Some were more interested i n the fine balance between 
Providence and will (Fuller, Pfotenhauer, Glover) whereas others took a view 
with more emphasis on the frailty of the will (Levitin, Reinken, Forbes). 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
18  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Although sometimes connected to the workings of Providence, some critics saw 
the opposition of good and evil as a theme in its own right, arguing that the 
cosmic struggle found in the events of Middle -earth is essentially Christian 
(Barber, Hodgart, Kilby)  and that it presents a non -dualistic, Augustianian 
perspective (Miesel, Glover). Another recurring theme is that of Christ -like 
figures in the narrative. Frodo, with his suffering and his sacrifice, is the 
foremost of these, followed by Gandalf, with his resurrection. Aragorn can be 
seen as Christ the King, and even Sam is identified by one critic as Christ -like 
(though another equates him with Peter). One further theme concerned the 
Christian significance of the pity and mercy shown by Frodo to Gollum, and the 
possibility of redemption for characters such as Boromir and Saruman. 
What then of the relationship between these Christian views of The Lord 
of the Rings and the pagan views seen earlier? To the extent that they contradict 
each other, it seems to me that the contradiction lies more in the labels being 
applied, than in the substance of what is being labelled. Providence looms large 
in the Christian themes c onsidered above, though as we have seen, it was also 
acknowledged by some that there is little overt Christianity in the work (Fuller, 
Reinken, Urang). One may recall that critics who viewed The Lord of the Rings as 
pagan or non-Christian could just as readily see this lack of overt Christianity as 
evidence for their own (opposing) view. Such opposition is therefore anchored 
more in the perspective of the critic than in any contradiction in the work itself—
after all, they agree on what they see (or don’t see!) —they just don’t agree on 
what that means. A pagan or non -Christian view could look at the hints of a 
higher power intervening in the events of Middle -earth, and label t his not as 
Providence, but as Fate, be it impersonal (Parker) or otherwise (Spacks); as some 
unnamed higher power (Ellwood); or as a manifestation of natural religion 
(Dowie). Whatever Tolkien really meant, he did not nail his colours to the mast, 
and this ambiguity opens the door to competing interpretations—but ambiguity 
is not contradiction. Similarly, a cosmic struggle between good and evil may 
appear, to a Christian, to be a very Christian affair —though adherents of many 
other religions (and those who subscribe to none) may beg to differ. Both Parker 
and Moorman identified a struggle against evil as a characteristic of their pagan 
intepretations, and good and evil were the focus of Ellwood’s 1969 article which 
was free of a Christian interpretation. Whatever the label, the substance remains 
the same —a struggle between good and evil. Another theme which reveals 
some of this ambiguity is that of Christ-like figures in the work. What do critics 
see when they identify such figures? Foremost are the suffering and sacrifice of 
Frodo, and the resurrection of Gandalf. Such qualities might point towards 
something messianic, but at the same time they are not necessarily so. Sacrifice 
and suffering can be seen as heroic qualities —indeed Ellwood’s analysis of 
Christ-figures in her 1970 monograph argues that “Christ is also a type -hero 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  19 
who fights the evil one, dies, and returns to life” (“Good News” 104). If some 
critics label Frodo as Christ -like, while others label him as a hero without such 
associations, his suffering and his sacrifice remain the same. 
 
A MARRIAGE OF THE PAGAN AND THE CHRISTIAN 
As we have seen, one view of The Lord of the Rings is that it is a covertly 
Christian work, delivering its message without appearing to do so, simply by 
avoiding doctrine and dogma or by presenting the whole in an attractively 
pagan setting (Reinken, Urang). Whether one subscribes to this view or not (and 
even if one does, the question remains whether this was done deliberately), it 
suggests a means by which the Christian and the pagan co-exist within the work. 
Even without a crypto -Christian purpose, a mar riage of pagan and Christian 
elements was recognised and considered by many critics in the period to 1981, 
and to them I will now turn. 
From a scholarly perspective at least, Charles Moorman was not a man 
to take a narrow view, nor to remain stuck in his ways. Already we have seen 
how (in his 1969 article) he argued for an essentially pagan view of The Lord of 
the Rings. As we will see below, just 3 years later he would repudiate (at least in 
part) that view, making a case for a Christian interpretation. Before either of 
these articles, Moorman considered both sides, in a chapter on Tolkien in his 
1966 monograph Precincts of Felicity: The Augustinian City of the Oxford Christians 
(reprinted in Isaacs and Zimbardo’s Tolkien and the Critics  in 1968). Here, he 
describes The Lord of the Rings as “essentially a Nordic myth” (201), adding later 
that “the greatest single influence on Tolkien is the eddas and sagas of the 
North.” He speaks of how “the great Nordic theme of courage —courage to 
grapple not only with human foes, but with the monsters of the outer 
darkness—runs through The Lord of the Rings  as it does through Beowulf” (212). 
Alongside all of this is a clear statement of a structure to the work that reflects a 
strongly Christian theme—the journey of Frodo, the quest of the myth hero, in 
a way that reflects in Augustinian terms “the establishment of the City of God 
on Earth” (Minas Tirith) and where the Shire and Mordor represent the Earthly 
City (210). Moorman does not however place these pagan and Christian 
elements in relation to each other. 
One of the earliest clear statements of the interaction of pagan and 
Christian elements appeared in a review essay by Michael Wood in New Society 
in 1969. Wood describes the theology of The Lord of the Rings as “an extraordinary 
synthesis of heroic northern myth and Christian promise.” He states that 
Tolkien believes in Christian Providence but also that “within Time the 
monsters win.” The capitalisation of “Time” is significant —this reveals how 
Wood sees the two concepts co-existing, for Time is terrestrial: “the treats come 
later, in the islands of the blessed.” However, such co -existence does not, for 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
20  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Wood, deny a tension where the heroic theme of the work “seems strangely at 
odds” with its elegiac tone (493). Another critic who saw a synthesis of the pagan 
and the Christian was C. Stuart Hannabuss, who at the start of a 1971 article set 
out his view with great clarity: “I believe that Tolkien was working out a quasi-
Christian morality in pagan terms, using a former culture and literary tradition 
to furnish the scenario to a quest which incorporated the major issues of Life” 
(87). Hannabuss observed a du alistic struggle between the “broadly good and 
bad” which he characterises as Christian in so far as the good are victorious —
and yet the victory is “almost Pyrrhic: so clearly do the heroes anticipate and 
acknowldge defeat that we are in the world of Beowu lf and the Norse sagas” 
(87–88). There is more too from a Christian perspective, with subconscious 
allusions to Christian iconography (the Nazgûl as the Four Horsemen of the 
Apocalypse, Gandalf on a white horse evoking the text of Revelation) —though 
there is something running deeper: “subsuming the overtly Biblical is the story 
which can in poetry mirror man’s dilemmas and look Life in the eye” (93–94). 
In a 1972 monograph on Tolkien, Robley Evans acknowledges both 
pagan and Christian elements in The Lord of the Rings. In similar terms to Wood, 
he recognises a fusion between the two, while acknowledging their opposition: 
“the elegiac tone of Tolkien’s fantasies” being “contrary to the Christian joy of 
affirmation associated with the romance [genre]” (83). Thus the roma nce Quest 
reveals meaning and order in the universe while the Northern European 
tradition encapsulates “man’s struggle to preserve something of civilization for 
a little while against the dark, perhaps nameless, forces that will triumph over 
him in the end” (84). Evans sees the tension and opposition as one reason for the 
work’s power: “[Tolkien] is an author who can make his sense of joy and of fate 
profitable because they can be played off against each other” (84). 
Also in 1972, Moorman issues the corrective referred to above, 
disavowing his “earlier identification of Tolkien as an underground pagan” 
(”Heroism” 31). The use of the word “underground” is curious here —I am not 
able to discern, in his 1969 article, any indication of Moorman equating Tolkien’s 
personal world view with the pagan qualities of his work. In any event, 
Moorman explains that his volte-face is grounded in a close and uninterrupted 
reading of the Frodo-Samwise narrative, “skipping the adventures of the other 
members of the Fellowship, a narrative which, though necessary, is none -the-
less peripheral” (29). His conclusion from this reading is t hat the heroism 
encapsulated in the Frodo -Samwise narrative is characterised by “specifically 
Christian ethical qualities —endurance, humility, mercy, and purity —as 
opposed to the more usual heroic values —courage, prowess, loyalty” (35). 
Furthermore, in the  same vein as Levitin, Reinken and Forbes, Moorman 
identifies a Christian theme in the ultimate failure of the will to achieve the 
destruction of the Ring, so that this climactic scene suggests that “God, using 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  21 
Satan’s own weakness, his greed for power, must snatch victory from defeat on 
behalf of man” (38). While those other critics took a firmly Christian view, 
Moorman continues to recognise the significance of pagan elements in the work. 
We have already seen h ow he draws the distinction between Christian ethical 
qualities and the “usual” heroic virtues, and he argues that The Lord of the Rings 
is “a mixture of pagan spirit and Christian ethos […] in which the proportions 
defy measurement” (38). Hard as it might  be to measure these proportions, 
Moorman does offer a view on a key touchpoint between the two—the exercise 
of free will. In the absence of a clear or overt divine influence, what matters are 
the actions of the hero: “it is this emphasis on the free will of the individual and 
his responsibility to common humanity which provides a link between Tolkien’s 
Christianity and his paganism” (32). Moorman, in similar terms to Evans, also 
argues that the tension and opposition between these two (an “ambivalence of 
value”) is a prime reason for the greatness of the work (38). 
Three further critics writing in the first half of the 1970s would also 
observe a combination of Christian and pagan (or “pre -Christian”) elements in 
The Lord of the Rings, though without identifying a tension or opposition between 
the two. In a 1972 article, Douglas Barbour sees some truth in how Parker 
highlights the heroic -elegiac tone of the work, but feels that Parker does not 
allow room for the optimism that reflects Tolkien’s Christian perspective, 
adding that Tolkien does not follow the Beowulf poet in accepting defeat for both 
gods and heroes as an inevitable outcome: “for his imagination is powerfully 
Christian, and he sees the victory of good as always possible” (36). Thus Parker’s 
view is too narrow: “it is not just the elegiac feeling which is p roduced” (38). 
Paul Kocher in a 1972 monograph looks at Tolkien’s treatment of good and evil, 
and sees in this “how far Tolkien wishes his treatment of evil to be considered 
not only moral but metaphysical,” (76) though adding a note of caution against 
“forc[ing] a literary masterpiece into any tight philosophical mold, Thomistic or 
otherwise. Middle -earth is avowedly pre -Christian” (77). At the same time, 
Kocher observes in the work “a general foundation of natural theology in the 
areas of moral norms and the working out of a providential cosmic order,” with 
the consequence that the free peoples of Middle -earth have a status “which if 
not precisely Christian is still very much like it in overall tone” (84–85). In a 1974 
monograph, Randel Helms looks at the fusion of pagan and Christian elements 
in the context of Tolkien’s Beowulf lecture. Helms notes how Tolkien defended 
the poem from charges that it is a “deeply flawed mixture of pagan and 
Christian” before adding that “Tolkien urges that this very fusion is the source 
of much of the poem’s power.” Helms argues that the defense o f the Beowulf 
poet (in Helms’s words, “already himself on the Christian side but still 
imaginatively alive to the ancient traditions”) is just as powerful a defense of 
Middle-earth, noting for example that the monsters in both tales are enemies of 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
22  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
mankind as well as enemies of God. That being said, Helms sees in The Lord of 
the Rings  (as did Urang) the same suppression of Christianity that Tolkien 
observed in Beowulf—though unlike Urang, he does not infer an apologistic 
purpose on Tolkien’s part (5–6).  
The last critic to be considered here made a similar observation to 
Wood, Evans and Moorman, concerning the tension and opposition between 
pagan and Christian elements in The Lord of the Rings . In a 1980 article whose 
principal thesis concerns Tolkien’s use of humour, C.D. Stevens sees tension in 
“Tolkien’s attempt to reconcile two disparate and sometimes conflicting sources 
of inspiration for his view of human existence: the ‘Commedia’ of the Christian 
mythos with the considerably bleaker view of the unive rse typified by much 
Anglo-Saxon poetry, including Beowulf.” For Stevens, a result of this attempted 
reconciliation is “a tale in which comic reintegration and elegiac resignation 
struggle to dominate tone” (122). It is worth looking closely though at what 
Stevens says—the conflict he identifies is not in The Lord of the Rings, but in two 
sources of inspiration —the Christian and the pagan. Is this splitting hairs? I 
suggest not, for the distinction is important in considering whether (and how 
far) conflicting views on Tolkien’s work may be a consequence of conflicts in the 
work. Stevens says that the Christian mythos is opposed to the pagan view of 
the universe. However, neither of these is lifted lock, stock and barrel into The 
Lord of the Rings . Indeed, Stevens observes that in Christian belief, “tragedy is 
frequently considered to have been rendered impossible by the twin facts of 
grace and redemption” but that “this attitude is modified in literature” (for 
example, by chance or by the freedom to accept or  reject grace). He observes 
Christian elements in Tolkien’s work, especially moral and ethical qualities, but 
notes at the same time an absence of  “an assured destiny akin to the concept of 
salvation” (128). So where then is the conflict with the pagan wo rld? As noted 
above, it is the tone of the work where Stevens sees a conflict, not for example in 
theology or doctrine. 
Looking at these views of the marriage of pagan and Christian 
elements, a picture begins to emerge, where there is broad agreement that the 
dominant pagan element is the elegiac tone of the work, and that Christianity is 
represented by moral and ethical qu alities, as well as by an optimistic (indeed, 
joyous) view of the victory of good over evil. Not all of the critics considered in 
this section make a point about tension or opposition between pagan and 
Christian elements—but those who do are in agreement that it is the tone of the 
work where the conflict lies (with the possible exception of Moorman who sees 
ambivalence in the value systems of the two). As noted above, we have an 
elegiac tone at odds with the theme of heroism (Wood), or opposed to Christian 
joy (Evans), or grappling with the Christian “Commedia” (Stevens). Even critics 
who made no particular point about tension or opposition saw tone as an 
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  23 
important part of the pagan -Christian dynamic —an elegiac feeling rubbing 
shoulders with the possibility of victory (Barber), or a Christian tone in a pre -
Christian setting (Kocher). All of this is important, because tone is more 
elusive—and arguably more s ubjective—than theology or doctrine. It lends 
itself less to binary positions, and more to a spectrum of feeling. There is no 
Ragnarök in The Lord of the Rings, nor is there an Armageddon. There is sadness, 
and loss, mingled with hope, and joy. The minglin g of such things does not 
mean that the work embodies an opposition between pagan and Christian views 
of the world. It means that it is bittersweet. So if critics and readers argue over 
whether the work is pagan or Christian, that argument is grounded to a  far 
greater degree in their own perspectives, than to any contradiction in the work 
itself. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Many critics have identified The Lord of the Rings  as essentially 
Christian. Many have identified in it a homage to a pagan world. In doing so, 
inferences have to be drawn and interpretations have to be made. Those 
inferences and interpretations all have the same point of departure —the work 
itself. Lookin g at critical responses up to 1981, the debate and disagreement 
between Christian and pagan views seems to have been a product not of 
contradictions in the work, but of its ambiguity, at least in theologica l matters. 
This ambiguity left the critical field open for scholars and critics, who would 
bring their wide range of perspectives to bear, to reach competing and even 
contradictory conclusions. For that reason, the period suggests that a more 
appropriate lens for viewing the pagan and Christian dynamic in The Lord of the 
Rings is that presented by Flieger in 2014 in “But What Did He Really Mean?,” 
where she highlights the ambiguity and indeterminacy of the work. The central 
part played by contradiction in h er keystone analogy from 2019 makes that 
particular lens less fitting. It would be of interest to examine the pagan and 
Christian interpretations of the work after the publication of The Letters of J.R.R. 
Tolkien in 1981 (and the increased awareness of Tolkien’s own statements that 
would have followed), to see what role ambiguity and contradiction play in later 
interpretations. Furthermore, the pairs of contradictory labels presented in “The 
Arch and the Keystone” provide ample opportunity to examine specific threads 
in the history of Tolkien criticism, to look behind the labels, and to see just how 
far each of these reflects a tension and an opposition in Tolkien and his works.  
 
 
 
 
 
Matthew Thompson-Handell 
24  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
ACKNOWLEDMENT 
I am greatly indebted to the referee for their generous feedback and advice on my 
initial submission, with invaluable guidance on both bibliographical essays as well 
as the recent critical environment. This article is due in no small part to their time 
and effort, freely given.  
 
WORKS CITED 
Barber, Dorothy K. “The Meaning of The Lord of the Rings .” The Tolkien Papers: Ten 
Papers Prepared for the Tolkien Festival at Mankato State College, October 28 and 29, 
1966, Mankato State College, 1967, pp. 38–50.  
Barbour, Douglas. “‘The Shadow of the Past’: History in Middle Earth.” University of 
Windsor Review, vol. 8, no. 1, 1972, pp.35–42.  
Beatie, Bruce A. “The Tolkien Phenomenon.” Journal of Popular Culture, vol. 3, no. 4, 
1970, pp. 689–703.  
Boswell, George W. “Tolkien as Littérateur.” South Central Bulletin , vol. 32, no. 4, 
1972, pp. 188–97.  
Braude, Nan. “Sion and Parnassus: Three Approaches to Myth.” Mythlore, vol. 1, no. 
1, #1, 1969, pp. 6–8.  
Dowie, William. “The Gospel of Middle -Earth According to J.R.R. Tolkien.” J.R.R. 
Tolkien, Scholar and Storyteller , edited by Mary Salu and Robert T. Farrell. 
Cornell UP, 1979, pp. 265–85.  
Ellwood, Gracia Fay. “The Good Guys & the Bad Guys.” Tolkien Journal, vol. 3, no. 4, 
#10, pp. 9–11.  
—. Good News from Tolkien’s Middle Earth. William B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1970.  
Evans, Robley. J.R.R. Tolkien. Warner Paperback Library, 1972.  
Flieger, Verlyn. “The Arch and the Keystone.” Mythlore, vol. 38, no. 1, #135, 2019, pp. 5–17.  
—. “But What Did He Really Mean?” Tolkien Studies, vol. 11, 2014, pp. 149–66.  
Forbes, Cheryl. “Frodo Decides—Or Does He?” Christianity Today, 19 Dec. 1975, pp. 
10–13.  
Fuller, Edmund. “The Lord of the Hobbits: J.R.R. Tolkien.” Tolkien and the Critics, edited 
by Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Uof Notre Dame P, 1968, pp. 17–39.  
Glover, Willis B. “The Christian Character of Tolkien’s Invented World.” Mythlore, 
vol. 3, no. 2, #10, 1975, pp. 3–8.  
Hannabuss, C. Stuart. “Deep Down: A thematic and bibliographical excursion.” 
Signal, no. 6, 1971, pp. 87–95.  
Helms, Randel. Tolkien’s World. Houghton Mifflin, 1974.  
Hodgart, Matthew. “Kicking the Hobbit.” The New York Review of Books, 4 May 1967, pp. 10-11.  
Kilby, Clyde S. “Mythic and Christian Elements in Tolkien.” Myth, Allegory and Gospel: 
An Interpretation of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, G.K. Chesterton, Charles Williams , 
edited by John Warwick Montgomery, Bethany Fellowship, 1974, pp. 119–43.  
Kocher, Paul. Master of Middle -earth: The Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien . Houghton Mifflin, 
1972.  
No Ragnarök, No Armageddon: Pagan and Christian Interpretations 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  25 
Levitin, Alexis. “The Hero in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings.” The Tolkien Papers: 
Ten Papers Prepared for the Tolkien Festival at Mankato State College, October 28 and 
29, 1966, Mankato State College, 1967, pp. 25–37.  
Lewis, C.S. “Sometimes Fairy Stories May Say Best What’s to be Said.” The New York 
Times, 18 Nov. 1956, p. 310.  
Lynch, James. “The Literary Banquet and the Eucharistic Feast: Tradition in Tolkien.” 
Mythlore, vol. 5, no. 2,  #18, 1978, pp. 13–4.  
Miesel, Sandra. “Some Religious Aspects of The Lord of the Rings.” Riverside Quarterly, 
vol. 3, no. 3, 1968, pp. 209–13.  
Moorman, Charles. “The Shire, Mordor and Minas Tirith.” Tolkien and the Critics, edited 
by Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. U of Notre Dame P, 1968, pp. 201–17.  
—. “‘Now Entertain Conjecture of a Time’ —The Fictive Worlds of C.S. Lewis and 
J.R.R. Tolkien.” Shadows of Imagination: The Fantasies of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien 
and Charles Williams , edited by Mark. R. Hillegas , 1969. 2nd ed., Southern 
Illinois UP, 1979, pp. 59–69.  
—. “Heroism in The Lord of the Rings.” Southern Quarterly, vol. 11, no. 1, 1972, pp. 29–39.  
Palmer, Bruce. Of Orc-rags, Phials, & a Far Shore: Visions of Paradise in The Lord of the 
Rings. T–K Graphics, 1976. 
Parker, Douglass. “Hwaet We Holbytla . . .” The Hudson Review, vol. 9, no. 4, 1957, 
pp. 598–609.  
Pfotenhauer, Paul. “Christian Themes in Tolkien.” Cresset, vol. 32, no. 3, 1969, pp.13–15.  
Reinken, Donald L. “ The Lord of the Rings : A Christian Refounding of the Political 
Order.” Tolkien Journal, vol. 2, no. 3, #5, pp. 4–10.  
Spacks, Patricia Meyer. “Ethical Pattern in The Lord of the Rings.” Critique, vol. 3, no. 
1, 1959, pp. 30–42.  
Stevens, C.D. “High Fantasy versus Low Comedy: Humor in J.R.R. Tolkien.” 
Extrapolation, vol. 21, no. 2, 1980, pp. 122–9.  
Stimpson, Catherine. J.R.R. Tolkien. Columbia University Press, 1969.  
Urang, Gunnar. “Tolkien’s Fantasy: The Phenomenology of Hope.” Shadows of 
Imagination: The Fantasies of C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien and Charles Williams, edited 
by Mark. R. Hillegas. 1969. 2nd ed., Southern Illinois UP, 1979, pp. 97–110.  
West, Richard C. Tolkien Criticism: An Annotated Checklist. Rev. ed., Kent State UP, 1981.  
Wood, Michael. “Tolkien’s fictions.” New Society, 27 March 1969, pp. 492–3.  
 
MATTHEW THOMPSON-HANDELL is an independent scholar with a particular 
interest in responses to Tolkien's work, both critical and popular. He has written 
articles for the Journal of Tolkien Research, Beyond Bree and Angerthas (the journal 
of Arthedain, the Tolkien Society of Norway). 
 
  

  
 

  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  27 
 
                       
                       N ASPIRATIONAL CULTUS ? 
                             TOLKIEN FANDOM AT THE  
                                   BORDERS OF BELIEF  
           
                                            TOM EMANUEL  
 
PRELUDE: A DEPLORABLE CULTUS? 
 HAVE ALWAYS FELT THAT CEMETERIES ARE TOLKIENIAN PLACES: the thoughtful 
stillness, the intertwining of natural rhythms and the work of human hands, 
the awareness of mortality and deep time. I grew up down the street from a 
historic graveyard, and it was not uncommon for visitors to find me sitting, 
cross-legged, in the shade of a honey locust tree with a dog -eared paperback in 
hand—perhaps my father’s Ballantine paperback copy of The Return of the King, 
the one with Barbara Remington’s unforgettable cover art. My younger self 
would have been overjoyed to know that twenty-odd years later he would find 
himself at J.R.R. Tolkien’s grave in Oxford with hundreds of likeminded others, 
summoned by our shared passion for Middle -earth and the man who wrote it 
into being. The occasion of our meeting is Oxonmoot, the annua l gathering of 
the U.K. Tolkien Society, and our convergence upon Oxford’s Wolvercote 
Cemetery on this early September afternoon commemorates the fiftieth 
anniversary of our favorite author’s death. 
Clad in everything from formalwear to faded T -shirts and 
handwoven cloaks, we wend our way through the headstones to the grave 
which Tolkien shares with his wife Edith. The chair of the Tolkien Society greets 
us and invites us into a space of quiet reflect ion—not difficult to achieve in a 
sunny graveyard in late summer. Having gathered our thoughts to Tolkien and 
the ways in which his works have touched our lives, we listen to a reading from 
the climax of The Lord of the Rings (LotR): the destruction of the One Ring and the 
fall of Barad -dûr, followed by Gandalf’s rescue of Sam and Frodo from the 
wrack of Mount Doom and the hobbits’ awakening amidst the green trees of 
Ithilien. When the reality of Sam’s deliverance dawns upon him and he cries 
aloud, “I feel like spring after winter, and sun on the leaves; and like trumpets 
and harps and all the songs I have ever heard” (LotR VI.4.952), tears pool at the 
corners of my eyes. Then the reading ends and the crowd lapses into 
contemplative silence. I glance around me: fellow attendees are withdrawing 
tissues from the pockets of their cosplay outfits, squeezing the hands of loved 
ones, weeping in earnest. At an unspoken signal, representatives of the Tolkien 
Society and other fan organizations lay memorial wreaths up on the Tolkiens’ 
grave. When this is done, a single unaccompanied voice rises in song: 
I 
Tom Emanuel 
28  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
“Namarië,” Galadriel’s hymn of parting to the Fellowship of the Ring in 
Lothlórien. When the music has died away, and there is nothing left but “sun on 
the leaves” (LotR VI.4.952) and wind in the grass, we breathe a sigh of relief that 
settles somewhere between nervous laughter and tears. The memorial, and by 
extension Oxonmoot, has reached its end. The time has come to bid each other 
goodbye. 
Past attendees of Oxonmoot will recognize what I have just described 
as Enyalië, a word which means remembrance in Tolkien’s invented language 
Quenya. Ever since Tolkien’s death in 1973, fans have gathered at his graveside 
each September for this ritual of memory and appreciation. Yet as moved as I 
was by Enyalië 2023, I am not sure that Tolkien would have quite ap proved of 
it. In a 1965 letter, his friend W.H. Auden wrote to him “fear[ing] that most of 
the members” of the newly organized New York Tolkien S ociety “would be 
lunatics” ( The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien [Letters] 500, #275). Tolkien responded 
wearily: “Yes, I have heard about the Tolkien Society. Real lunatics don’t join 
them, I think. But still such things fill me too with alarm and despondency” 
(500). He would give the U.K. Tolkien Society his blessing four yea rs later and 
serves, to this day, as its president in perpetuo. But there is little question that his 
relationship to his literary devotees was always one of ambivalence, leading him 
to infamously dub his burgeoning fandom “my deplorable cultus” (Carpenter 
233). Given Tolkien’s philological background, it seems reasonable to assume 
that his use of the word “cultus,” with its strong religious connotations, was 
deliberate. The word “fan” itself  has its origins in the Latin fanaticus, referring 
to temple devotees (Jenkins, Textual Poachers [Poachers] 12), and its emergence 
during the late nineteenth century as a descriptor for ardent lovers of sports and 
music was likely intended to evoke associa tions of religious enthusiasm 
(Cavicchi, “Foundational Discourses of Fandom” 29–30). Tolkien the philologist 
seems to have intuited what the history of the word implies: there is a connection 
between the passion of the fan and the devotion of the believer. 
Given his apprehensions regarding his “cultus,” his Roman Catholic 
faith, and his insistence that his legendarium did not constitute “any kind of 
new religion or vision” (Letters 403, #211), Tolkien might well have eyed Enyalië 
with suspicion. Perhaps he would worry that we were engaged in idolatry, 
venerating him as a secular saint or literary deity. Superficially at least, there 
might be something to this: with its graveyard setting, communal readings, and 
meditative silences, the Enyalië I attended reminded me of nothing so much as 
Christian liturgy. But speaking as a practicing Christian, it did not threaten my 
religious commitments in any way; at no point was I concerned that we were 
worshiping Tolkien the man. If anything, the memorial’s worship-like structure 
made it more impactful for me, not less. What are we to make of this collision 
between Tolkien fandom and the trappings of faith? 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  29 
In what follows I will attempt to answer this question, which is thornier 
than it might at first appear. I will first survey the state of scholarly debate 
around fandom and religion before outlining my own working definition of 
religion as sacred worldbuilding.  I will link this to Tolkien’s theory of fantasy 
worldbuilding in his essay “On Fairy-stories” (OFS) to propose a framework for 
understanding and researching the religious qualities and affordances of 
fandom as the activities of a secondary faith comm unity. I will then use this 
framework to exegete Enyalië as a prime example of what might be called a fan 
liturgy, a powerful collective experience that takes religious form without 
carrying overt religious content. Having undertaken this interdisciplinary 
pilgrimage, I will arrive at my conclusion: that Tolkien’s secondary world, his 
community of devoted fans, and th e lineaments of Christian ritual have 
combined to produce, in Enyalië, a fan practice which troubles the boundaries 
between the sacred and the  secular, the world(s) of fantasy literature and the 
world(s) of everyday experience. This would almost certainly have made J.R.R. 
Tolkien uncomfortable. But as I hope to show, it tells us something important 
about why his fiction remains compelling to so many people of so many faiths—
and offers, perhaps, some lessons to existing communities of meaning in a 
pluralistic, post-Christian world. 
 
GATHERING: SECONDARY BELIEVERS, SECONDARY WORLDS 
As Tolkien inferred, there are many striking parallels between media 
fandom1 and religion. Pioneering fan theorist Henry Jenkins ( Poachers 17–18) 
writes of fans’ intense identification with beloved characters and stories, while 
Matt Hills points out that fandom involves immersion in fantastic, 
“hyperdiegetic” worlds (104). John Lyden draws attention to fandom’s careful 
exegesis of “canonical” te xts (783–84), a commitment which can result in fiery 
debates with rival interpretive communities (cf. Walls -Thumma 93–95). These 
debates then result in exclusion along lines of race, gender, sexuality, and other 
axes of marginalization (Hannell 25, Pande 209, Stanfill 195, Thomas and 
Stornaiulo para. 3.1). What to make of these parallels is another matter. To paint 
an ongoing scholarly debate in broad strokes, there are three general “schools” 
 
1 I use the terms “fandom” and “media fandom” interchangeably in this essay to indicate 
fandoms which coalesce around narrative media: books, films, video games, television 
shows, and the like. Other forms of fandom obviously exist, such as music and sports 
fandom; but following Mark Duffett’s lead (3), I exclude them from consideration for the 
sake of analytical clarity. I believe that the underlying dynamics of, say, sports fandom 
and media fandom are much closer than Duffett seems to think; Tolkien himself suggests 
as much when he compares the spell cast by fantasy to the spell cast by a game of cricket 
(OFS 51). However, folding other categories of fandom into my analysis would require 
more space than the present essay allows. 
Tom Emanuel 
30  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
of interpretation within the field of fan studies. Scholars in the first school, 
including Michael Jindra (229), Candy Leonard (20 –22), Jennifer Porter (279), 
and Jennifer Otter Bickerdike (8), claim that fandom either is a new religious 
movement or that it effectively replaces religion in an increasingly secularized 
culture. Those in the second school, such as Andrew Crome (413), Mark Duffett 
(146–47), and Henry Jenkins ( Fans, Gamers, and Bloggers 17–18), reject the 
comparison, arguing that fandom lacks religion’s exclusive ethical demands and 
transcendent frame of reference. Scholars in the third and final school take the 
real similarities between the two phenomena seriously without accepting a one-
to-one correspondence between them, viewing fandom as an e xistential 
(Cavicchi, Tramps Like Us [Tramps] 188) or “neoreligious” (Hills 85) project of 
identity and community formation (Zubernis and Larsen 154–55). 
In large part these debates come down to definitions of religion. Those 
who reject parallels between fandom and religion tend to use narrow substantive 
definitions, which are concerned with formal characteristics of religion such as 
institutional arrangements, doctrines, claims for the existence of supernatural 
agents, etc. Those who embrace the parallels prefer broad functionalist definitions, 
which are less about what religion “is”  and more about what religion “does”: 
the various functions it performs in the lives of individuals, communities, and 
societies. Those in the middle tend to blend functionalist and phenomenological 
approaches; the latter center on “the lived experience and perceptions of people 
in relation to religion and the sacred” (Lynch 128)—what religions “feels like” if 
you will. The definitions we use inescapably shape what we consider to be 
religious and, therefore, worthy of study. As Michael Elliott cautions, “if we 
insist on comparing fandoms to religion, then we need to be clear about which 
scholarly approaches we are using” (109). I intend to do just that. 
For the purposes of this study, I draw upon both functionalist and 
phenomenological approaches to define religion as sacred worldbuilding. This is 
a creative adaptation of sociologist Peter Berger’s definition of religion as 
“cosmization in a sacred mode” (26). For Berger, all human society and culture 
is worldbuilding activity. First and foremost this means the construction of a 
meaningful world, a symbolic cosmos within which humans can scaffold their 
actions and experiences as part of a purposive whole ( 20). What distinguishes 
religious worldbuilding in particular from social worldbuilding in general is its 
explicitly sacred character. All socially constructed worlds seek to answer 
questions of meaning: Where do we come from? Where do we belong? What is 
our purpose? Why do we suffer? What happens when we die? Religion seeks to 
create and maintain a symbolic universe in which its answers to such questions 
retain ultimacy, and credibility, even in the face of human finitude and suffering 
(51), what Tolkien’s friend C.S. Lewis called the problem of pain. 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  31 
However, I want to nuance my definition around the nature of meaning, 
the nature of the sacred, and the supposed universality of the category  religion 
itself. Religion may be a world of meaning, but it is also a genuine world, 
experienced bodily and emotionally as well as symbolically and imaginatively. 
Following feminist critics (Ammerman 103–04, McDannell 145, McGuire 13–15), 
I make space in my understanding of religion for the embodied meanings of 
affect, ethical praxis, material culture, and—importantly for the present essay—
ritual. Likewise, the sacred has historically been understood as absolute 
transcendence, the Holy Other; this is how Berger himself defines it (26). 
However, this places us in danger of turning the transcendent God of 
Christianity in to the implicit yardstick by which we measure all religion 
everywhere (Asad 42, Mandair and Dressler 12). I prefer sociologist Gordon 
Lynch’s definition of the sacred as that which is held to be and experienced as sacred 
by a given individual or community under a given set of cultural and historical 
circumstances. On Lynch’s reading, the sacred 
 
exerts a gravitational pull on the feelings, motivations and behaviour of 
individuals and groups […]. It binds people into particular kinds of 
identities, communities and ways of living which are experienced not 
simply of their own free choice, but as comp elled or inspired by the 
sacred object. (138) 
 
Following on from this, I do not make any universal claims for my definition of 
religion. Instead, I posit it as a limited, stipulative understanding of religion in 
the modern West (cf. Taylor 15 –16), one with special utility for considering the 
religious affordances of fandom and popular culture. 
One major point in favor of adopting and adapting a flexible definition 
of religion -as-sacred-worldbuilding for the study of media fandom is that it 
mirrors the importance of worldbuilding to popular narratives, especially in an 
era of transmedia “extended  universes” (Jenkins, “Transmedia Storytelling 
101,” Wagner 212, Wolf 10–13). The notion of religion-as-sacred-worldbuilding 
also accords with Tolkien’s understanding of his literary project in “On Fairy -
stories.” There, Tolkien distinguishes between the primary world of everyday 
reality and the secondary world of the text , with the related terms primary belief 
and secondary belief (OFS 52). For Tolkien, sub-creation is both the human faculty 
of creativity as well as its imaginative product. His use of the prefix sub- denotes 
a distinction between the creativity of God, understood as ex nihilo or “out of 
nothing,” and human creativity, which uses the given elements of creation as it 
exists—the so -called primary world —and rearranges them to produce new 
things. In Tolkien’s Roman Catholic faith, human beings are created in the imago 
Dei, the image and likeness of God (New Revised Standard Version Updated Edition, 
Gen. 1:26 –27)—that is to say, created in the image of a Creator. For him, 
Tom Emanuel 
32  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
humanity’s sub-creative power, while derivative of and subordinate to God’s, is 
“ultimately of the same stuff” (OFS  47). One might even say that human 
creativity is a kind of participation in the Divine life, a co-creative improvisation 
upon the Music of Creation: as Tolkien puts it, “We make still by the law in 
which we’re made” (56). Any product of human art is an exa mple of sub -
creation, but Tolkien is chiefly concerned with language and its unique capacity 
to generate a secondary world in the reader’s imagination: 
 
[T]he story -maker proves a successful ‘sub -creator’. He makes a 
Secondary World which your mind can enter. Inside it, what he relates is 
‘true’: it accords with the laws of that world. You therefore believe it, 
while you are, as it were, inside. The moment disbelief arises, the spell is 
broken; the magic, or rather art, has failed. You are then out in the 
Primary World again, looking at the little abortive Secondary World from 
outside. (52) 
 
Secondary or literary belief in a secondary world is contingent upon the 
storyteller’s successful cultivation of the “inner consistency of reality” (59), that 
is, the construction of a world whose internal laws of operation, while different 
from the primary world, are nevertheless internally coherent and provide a 
plausibility structure for the story and its fantastic events. The construction, in 
short, of a meaningful world, one with the “inner consistency of reality” for 
those who believe. 
Even in this brief sketch, suggestive parallels emerge between the 
respective projects of religious as well as fantasy worldbuilding. Tolkien uses 
that worldbuilding medium par excellence , language, and more specifically 
narrative, to invoke a world and engender secondary belief therein. This is 
precisely what religious worldbuilding does, albeit on a more ambitious scale 
and with higher  metaphysical stakes. Tolkien already viewed secondary 
worldbuilding as an implicitly religious activity; I might go so far as to define it 
as secondary cosmization in an implicitly sacred mode. Following on from this, I posit 
fandom itself as a kind of secondary faith community . If religious worlds and 
fictional worlds share structures of believing, then the individuals and 
communities who use them as resources for crafting identity, community, and 
meaning may share structures of practice too. Battles over canonicity and the 
development of “fanon” (Duffett 217), fan tourism (Zubernis and Larsen 146), 
integration of fan object s into primary -world religious activities such as 
weddings (Robertson 169 –70), fan “conversion” experiences (Cavicchi, Tramps 
42), and the production of transformative works (Barenblat 175) can all find a 
place within this framework—and so can Enyalië. 
 
 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  33 
PROCLAIMING: A PILGRIMAGE TO MIDDLE-EARTH 
I am far from the first person to delve into Tolkien fandom as a subject 
of scholarly inquiry. My forerunners include Megan Abrahamson, Maria 
Alberto, Jane Glaubman, Robin Reid, Amy Sturgis, Karen Viars and Cait Coker, 
and Dawn Walls-Thumma as well as two massive global reception studies: The 
Lord of the Rings Project (Barker), a survey of fans of Peter Jackson’s film trilogy 
which received nearly 25,000 responses; and The World Hobbit Project (Barker), a 
similar survey of fans of Jackson’s Hobbit which col lected in excess of 36,000 
responses. Nor am I the first person to engage with the question of religion in 
Tolkien fandom. Previous studies include Markus Altena Davidsen’s 
ethnography of “Tolkien spirituality,” those who use Tolkien’s fictional 
legendarium as the basis for so-called “real-world” religion (188);2 Robin Reid’s 
examination of atheist, agnostic, and animist Tolkien fans (78); and Jeroen de 
Kloet and Giselinde Kuipers’ study of how viewers of Peter Jackson’s film 
trilogy “appropriate The Lord of the Rings […]  to articulate the idea of a spiritual 
self” (317). As valuable as these studies are, for present purposes I am less 
concerned with how fans’ (non)religious commitments interact with Tolkien’s 
fiction. Instead, I wish to examine how Tolkien fan practic es, in and of 
themselves, might be considered (secondarily) “religious” under the definition 
of religion which I advance above.  
If ever a practice were ripe for such consideration, it would be Enyalië. 
The graveside memorial which closes the Tolkien Society’s annual gathering is 
nearly as old as the Society itself. Founded in 1969 as a more “respectable” 
alternative to the explosio n of Tolkien fandom on U.S. college campuses in the 
late 1960s (Saler 191 –92), the Tolkien Society is not the oldest Middle -earth fan 
organization, but it is one of the longest -lived and most active (Coker 526 –27). 
Today it counts hundreds of members from around the world and numerous 
local chapters or “smials,” but it has much humbler origins as a small, tight-knit 
group of fellow-enthusiasts who communicated via mimeographed newsletter. 
Little more than a year after its namesake’s death on 2 September 197 3, a small 
group of Tolkien Society members gathered in Oxford from 13 –15 September 
1974 to tour sites associated with the Inklings, meet with Tolkien’s children 
Michael and Priscilla, and pay their respects at their favorite author’s grave. As 
Rosie and Stuart Clark, the editors of the Society’s bulletin Amon Hen, reported 
at the time, a “floral tribute was laid, and more photographs were taken. ‘A 
Elbereth Gilthoniel’ was recited over the grave, and we left his resting place with 
many a ‘Namarie [sic]!” (11). This simple ritual was the inaugural Enyalië, 
 
2 For a discussion of a similar phenomenon using very different source material, consult 
John Engle’s account of esoteric communities who incorporate H.P. Lovecraft’s Cthulhu 
Mythos into their belief and practice (87–92). 
Tom Emanuel 
34  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
though it was not yet called by that name; and the attendees swiftly agreed to 
make it, and Oxonmoot, an annual tradition.  
In the half-century since then, Oxonmoot has shifted to the beginning 
of September and expanded to involve hundreds of participants both onsite in 
Oxford as well as online. It is, if not unique, then certainly noteworthy among 
fan conventions (“fancons”) f or the ways in which it bridges conventional 
fandom and the academy. 3 Oxonmoot attendees can take part in the trivia 
competitions, amateur performances, fanart exhibitions, and costume contests 
which have long characterized fancons, as well as a slate of panels featuring 
papers from Tolkien scholars both established and emerging. This makes sense: 
many (though not all) Tolkien scholars first came to him as a subject for research 
because we love his works, making us prime examples of the somewhat clunky 
neologism “acafans.” Likewise, Tolkien’s own career as an Oxford professo r, 
and the clear influence of his professional interests on his fiction, have shaped 
how many readers engage with his work as a quasi -academic pursuit 
(Glaubman 265–67). As important as these elements of Oxonmoot may be, the 
Tolkien Society’s own website states that Enyalië “was the origin of Oxonmoot, 
and is in many ways [its] soul” (“Enyalië”). It is, in a sense, both where the 
gathering begins and where it ends, its alpha and its omega. Those of us in 
attendance at Enyalië 2023 were thus followers in a l ong line of pilgrims to 
Tolkien’s resting-place.  
I use the word “pilgrim” deliberately, for such visits to Tolkien’s grave 
are clear examples of fan pilgrimage or literary pilgrimage. There is a rich vein 
of scholarship on this subject, including work by Evgenia Amey, Anne Klara 
Bom, Lorraine Brown, Jane  Lovell and James Thurgill, Ryosuke Okamoto, 
Jennifer Otter Bickerdike, and Lynn Zubernis and Katherine Larsen. There have 
also been investigations of Tolkien -related tourism, including those by Anne 
Buchmann, Kevin Moore, and David Fisher and by Robbie Go h. But with one 
notable exception, I have not identified any studies which are not primarily 
concerned with fan travel to filming locations in New Zealand. Visits to 
Tolkien’s grave, by contrast, constitute a form of biographical tourism in which 
fans visi t sites directly associated with the author. These may include places 
where the author lived and worked, burial locations, and/or real -world locales 
which supposedly inspired their fiction. Visits to such sites reflect and reinforce, 
in the primary world, the reader’s “symbolic pilgrimage” through the secondary 
world of the text (Aden 88). This is certainly the case for Oxonmoot: the first 
attendees even referred to the famous Eagle and Child pub in Oxford as “the 
Mecca of any Inklings pilgrimage” (Clark and Clark 7). Such language mirrors 
 
3 Although I have not attended it in person as I have Oxonmoot, the Mythopoeic Society’s 
annual gathering, Mythcon, would be another example of this. 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  35 
what happens on traditional religious pilgrimage, where a physical journey 
through an external geography corresponds to an internal, imaginative journey 
of faith (Barush 201–03). As liminal spaces situated upon the boundaries of life 
and death, gravesites are common destinations for both religious as well as fan 
pilgrimages. Visitors may leave offerings such as candles, coins, or flowers 
(Brown 171) or take a moment in contemplative silence (Middleton 313) as ways 
of paying their respects.  
This is exactly how fan pilgrims interact with Tolkien’s grave. When 
Mina Lukić and Dejan Vukelić surveyed 500 visitors to Tolkien-related locations 
in the U.K., they found that 63 percent of them had visited Tolkien’s grave. Of 
those, 84.4 percent reporte d that it was either a very important or the most 
important Tolkien-related location they visited (68). Nine respondents outright 
used the words “quest” or “pilgrimage” to describe the experience (72), but far 
more drew upon the emotionally and spiritually  charged language of 
profundity, beauty, and even sacredness (76 –77). They reported engaging in a 
host of “rituals of homage enacted at Tolkien and Edith’s grave” which  
 
range[d] from silent contemplation to singing, reciting, reading excerpts 
from Tolkien’s works silently or aloud, or living wreaths, flowers, notes, 
drawings, coins, figurines, jewellery, and other tributes, as well as taking 
some mementos, which are usually photos, but several participants also 
mentioned gravestone rubbings, stones, or plants. (75–76) 
 
One respondent noted that their visit was “given further weight by the 
thousands of like -minded pilgrims who had sang, wept, and contemplated at 
that exact spot for so many years” (72). Many others said that the grave was 
where they felt closest to both Tolkien and to his work, prompted by the names 
Beren and Lúthien inscribed on the headstone alongside the Tolkiens’ proper 
names. “I think it’s the ultimate fantasy homage,” one respondent wrote . “The 
connection of his works and his real life manifested in stone” (82). This all makes 
imminent sense within the framework of fandom -as-secondary-faith. Just as 
“primary believers” in Christianity or Islam go on pilgrimage to the Holy Land 
to visit sites associated with a beloved religious world, “secondary believers” in 
Middle-earth go on pilgrimage to Oxford to visit sites associated with a beloved 
secondary world. As Lukić and Vukelić  point out, however, Enyalië is a 
communal practice, not merely a personal one (84–85). If pilgrimage is typically 
an act of individual devotion, what is the relevant parallel to a collective act like 
Enyalië? 
My answer would be liturgy—and using Constance Cherry’s fourfold 
framework of Christian worship, we can see just how closely Enyalië reproduces 
the lineaments of Western Christian liturgy. Just as the narthex of a church 
serves as a liminal threshold between the secular world “outside” and the sacred 
Tom Emanuel 
36  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
world “inside” the worship space (Turner 74 –75), the commute from the 
University of Oxford to Wolvercote Cemetery and the procession to Tolkien’s 
grave can be seen as “narthetical” actions. Once participants are in place, the 
welcome and invitation to reflection constitute the gathering, as scattered 
individuals are called into a collective liturgical body (Cherry 56). The second 
movement of worship, the proclaiming, is the space in a Christian service in 
which “people may be addressed by God through the Holy Scriptures and 
thereby changed for God’s glory and kingdom” (70). At Enyalië, however, there 
are neither readings from Scripture nor a homily. It is not the Wor d in a 
theological sense which is proclaimed but rather “mere” words, a selection from 
Tolkien’s writings. Next comes the responding, in which the gathered community 
takes ritual action in acknowledgement of what they have heard proclaimed: for 
“without some response, worship fails to fulfil its purpose —that of God and 
people in relationship” (99). In Western Christian services there have historically 
been a variety of responses to the proclamation of the Word: the prayers of the 
people, the offering, and most importantly to sacramental traditions such as the 
Roman Catholic Church, communion. At Enyalië, the response corresponds  to 
the silence which follows the reading, the laying of wreaths, and the singing of 
“Namarië.” This last acts as a hinge between responding and sending, which is 
“the final movement of the corporate worship service, in which we plan to 
‘disassemble’ as intentionally as we assembled” (112). This is the point at which 
a Tolkien Society representative announces the conclusion of the gathering and 
attendees bid each other farewell and leave the cemetery. 
For as closely as Enyalië hews to the structure of a Christian worship 
service, right down to its physical setting in a churchyard, it remains 
emphatically nonreligious. At the gathering I attended, the sole reference which 
could be construed as “theologic al” occurred when the chairperson of the 
Tolkien Society alluded to Tolkien’s notion of eucatastrophe, and then only 
insofar as Tolkien called it an “echo of evangelium”—that is, the Good News (OFS 
77). This follows: the Tolkien Society is a secondary fait h community not a 
primary one. Explicit gestures toward a deity or deities make little sense in that 
context. Yet my response to Enyalië, and that of other participants whom I 
witnessed in similarly heartfelt displays of emotion, felt more worshipful than 
anything I have ever experienced at a fancon. To the point: I always carry with 
me a polished hand sample of rose quartz from my hometown, a kind of 
personal talisman. Before the memorial began, I felt compelled to place my rose 
quartz on the edge of Tolki en’s grave for several minutes, as if it would absorb 
the spiritual energy of the occasion. Even in using the term “spiritual” here I 
acknowledge something exceeding literary appreciation; for as Matt Hills 
writes, religious language “does not surrender all religious force when used by 
fans, even if this use may also be ironic or humorous” (88). 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  37 
Yet here we are faced with a conundrum. According to Cherry, the 
primary purpose of Christian worship is to facilitate an encounter between the 
gathered community and God (54). Under my definition of religion -as-sacred-
worldbuilding, I might say that worsh ip, considered broadly beyond its 
Christian manifestations, is a technology of religious worldbuilding. It forms 
participants for participation in a meaningful cosmos and invites them into 
relationship with the sacred as their tradition understands it (cf. Woodhead 61–
62). No gods were invoked at the Enyalië I attended; no intercessory prayers 
were offered. Yet I felt as though the ritual brought me into contact with 
something which moved me to tears. Perhaps it was simply collective 
effervescence, Émile Durkheim’s coinage for the “electricity” which is generated 
by gatherings oriented toward a common sacred object. Collective effervescence 
reinforces group cohesion and engender s a sense of participation in an 
“impersonal, extra-individual force […] [which] makes [individuals] feel as if 
they are in contact with an extraordinary energy” (Carls). Collective 
effervescence is a common schema for analyzing fan activities such as rock 
concerts (Duffett 151 –52, Elliott 113, Leonard 29). But like many strictly 
functionalist accounts of religion, it risks reducing the sacred to the merely 
social. If my analytical framework for religion and fandom holds, then even if it 
was not inviting us into an encounter with  specific supernatural agents , the 
“secondarily sacred” space of Enyalië was still inviting us into an encounter. The 
question is: with what?4 
 
RESPONDING: THE BORDERS OF BELIEF 
I have argued that both religion and fandom share homologous 
structures of belief and meaning -making, but I have heretofore treated them as 
distinct, if related, phenomena. I now wish to consider whether religion and 
fandom ever transgress the border between one and the other; when and why 
that transgression occurs; and whether it is occurring at Enyalië. T o do this, I 
need to return to Tolkien’s theory of sub-creation and my theory of religion-as-
sacred-worldbuilding, to re -examine the relation between “pr imary” religious 
worlds and “secondary” fantasy worlds —and to see whether that apparently 
self-explanatory binary holds up under closer scrutiny. 
When Tolkien describes the means by which a human artist makes a 
“successful” secondary world, he notably does not call them a worldbuilder; 
rather, he calls them a “ story-maker” (OFS 52, emphasis mine). Tolkien 
understood intimately that narrative constitutes one of the generative logics of 
fantasy worldbuilding, serving as both an impetus to sub -creation and the 
 
4 Many thanks to Dr. Anna Milon for first posing this question to me, and for many 
thoughtful conversations to work out some answers. 
Tom Emanuel 
38  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
means by which the sub-created world is mediated to the reader (cf. Wolf 198). 
In the tradition of narrative theology, it also constitutes one of the generative 
logics of religious worldbuilding. Catholic theologian Johann Baptist Metz 
argues that, contrar y to the way in which systematic theology has often been 
done throughout Christian history, with religious narratives taken as 
illustrations of propositional truth,  
 
stories of conversion and of exodus do not serve as dramatic window -
dressing for a preformulated ‘pure’ theology. Rather, they belong to the 
fundamental way theology itself operates. […] On the contrary, talk 
about God has an essential and inalienable memo rative and narrative 
structure. (62) 
 
Likewise, in his explorations of Biblical parables, John Dominic Crossan posits 
that the Bible should itself be understood as parabolic, as a story first and 
foremost which is meant to upend the listener’s pat expectations and provoke 
spiritual and social transformation (56). Most germane to my present purposes 
is George Lindbeck, whose linguistic -cultural understanding of theology 
complements Tolkien’s understanding of the religiosity of narrative 
worldbuilding to a truly remarkable extent. 
For Lindbeck, religious symbols, stories, and rituals are themselves a 
kind of language, providing a grammar and a vocabulary in which religious 
communities communicate sacred meaning (cf. Woodhead 61 –62). To be 
religious, then, is to be fluent in the language that is religion. Lindbeck writes, 
from his standpoint as a Christian theologian: 
 
To become a Christian involves learning the story of Israel and Jesus well 
enough to interpret and experience oneself and one’s world in its terms. 
[…] A comprehensive scheme or story used to structure all dimensions 
of existence is not primarily a set of propositions to be believed, but is 
rather the medium in which one moves, a set of skills that one employs 
in living one’s life. (34–35) 
 
The Biblical tradition sings a religious world into existence by means of story, 
symbol, and ritual—and Christians enter into its story-world in much the same 
way that readers enter into Middle-earth. However, the key difference between 
the mere reader and the true believer is that for the latter, the story-world is not 
simply literary: 
 
For those who are steeped in them [religious narratives], no world is 
more real than the ones they create. A scriptural world is thus able to 
absorb the universe. It supplies the interpretive framework within which 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  39 
believers seek to live their lives and understand reality. […] It is the text, 
so to speak, which absorbs the world, rather than the world the text. (117–
118) 
 
I am reminded of Tolkien’s remarks on eucatastrophe , the sudden joyous turn 
in a work of fantasy which he sees as “the true form of fairy-tale, and its highest 
function” (OFS 75). For Tolkien, this is the moment at which a fairy-story comes 
closest to offering readers an intimation of the sacred: “In such stories when the 
sudden ‘turn’ comes we get a piercing glimpse of joy, and heart’s desire, that for 
a moment passes outside the frame, rends indeed the very web of story, and lets 
a gleam come through” (OF S 76). Note Tolkien’s and Lindbeck’s shared 
language of the story transcending its own narrative frame. 5 That, I argue, is 
what is happening at Enyalië: Tolkien’s secondary world is transcending its 
narrative frame, if only for as long as the ritual lasts. 
No doubt Tolkien’s grave in general, and Enyalië in particular, enable 
some participants to feel closer to J.R.R. Tolkien the historical person (Lukić and 
Vukelić 83 –84). I now reflect that placing my hand sample of rose quartz on 
Tolkien’s grave was motivated, in part, by an awareness that his mortal remains 
are laid to rest on this very spot. But it stretches credulity in more ways than one 
to describe Enyalië as veneration of Tolkien the man in place of a saint, let alone 
a god. Nor, I think, does it necessarily imply primary belief in the events and 
characters of his secondary world (cf. Davidsen 31–32). Rather, it is Enyalië itself 
which “passes outside the frame” of the text (OFS  76). For those of us who feel 
called to gather at Wolvercote Cemetery, Middle -earth is “real” enough to 
justify, not only the expenses associated with attending Oxonmoot, but also our 
physical and emotion al presence at an embodied ritual in a literal, liminal 
churchyard—all this despite, or alongside, any primary -world spiritual 
commitments we may or may not hold.  
But that is not all: for the building -blocks that make up Enyalië are 
quarried from Middle-earth itself. In a Christian liturgy, a historically common 
way of moving from the response into the sending is by singing the Nunc dimitis, 
the Song of Simeon: “Master, now you are dismissing your servant in peace, 
according to your word, for my eyes have seen your salvation, which you have 
prepared in the presence of all peoples, a light for revelation to the gentiles and 
for glory to your pe ople Israel” (Luke 2:29 –32). As discussed above, a 
performance of Galadriel’s farewell-song “Namarië” fulfils this role at Enyalië. 
The musical setting used at Enyalië is Tolkien’s own, who consciously modelled 
 
5 At the risk of theological overboldness, I might even say that a religious world can be 
thought of us a secondary world which has come to “absorb” the primary one —but to 
tweak the classic scholarly deflection, that passes well outside the frame of the pre sent 
paper. 
Tom Emanuel 
40  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
it on Gregorian chant (Tolkien & Swann v–vi). But the Quenya text of the poem 
gestures not toward theological salvation but toward Valinor —a place of great 
spiritual significance in the legendarium, no doubt, but not exactly the Christian 
Heaven. “Namarië” has effectively transcended its narrative context to become, 
itself, liturgical song. This is even clearer during the proclaiming section of the 
ritual. At Enyalië 2023, the excerpt from The Lord of the Rings spanning the fall of 
Barad-dûr to Sam’s awaken ing in Ithilien lasted about thirteen uninterrupted 
minutes. This gave attendees more time to deepen meaningfully into the story -
world than a shorter reading might have —or, for that matter, than many 
perfunctory readings of sacred texts in primary -world re ligious rituals. 
Moreover, this passage is part of the climax of The Lord of the Rings—”the most 
stunning eucatastrophe in modern literature,” as Verlyn Flieger would have it  
(“The Arch and the Keystone” 14). The only other moment in Tolkien’s 
legendarium that comes anywhere close is when the immortal Lúthien “plead[s] 
before the inexorable Mandos” ( Letters 590, #340) for the life of her mortal 
beloved Beren. But by chance, “if chance you call it” ( LotR I.7.126), Beren and 
Lúthien are present at Enyalië as well. Their names are emblazoned upon 
Tolkien’s headstone like the words “Do this in remembrance of me” (Luke 22:19) 
may be emblazoned upon a Christian altar. 
The line I just cited about “the inexorable Mandos” comes from a letter 
Tolkien wrote to his son Christopher in July 1972, as he was making 
preparations for his wife Edith’s grave. He draws a direct comparison between 
Lúthien and Beren on the one hand and Edith and himself on the other, 
requesting that her grave be inscribed with the Elvish name “which says for me 
more than a multitude of words: for she was (and knew she was) my Lúthien” 
(Letters 590, #350). Five decades later, Lukić and Vukelić reflected on their survey 
of visitors to the grave which the Tolkiens share: 
 
[I]t is a site where not only Tolkien and Edith are present, but also his 
fictional world, evoked by a simple, but powerful reference. This double 
presence can simultaneously tap into readers’ admiration and respect for 
the author himself and their love fo r his writings. This “fusion of 
Tolkien’s personal life and his ‘sub-creation’”for many visitors makes the 
grave the most important Tolkien-related place in the world[.] (71) 
 
For Tolkien, the line between “primary” and “secondary” had already long since 
blurred, at least as far as Beren and Lúthien were concerned; the story had 
transcended its narrative frame (cf. Flieger, “Tolkien’s Lúthien” 235). None of 
Tolkien’s fans will ever have the same relationship to those characters that their 
author did. But it does not seem unreasonable to me to infer that at least some 
Enyalië attendees are experiencing the interpenetration of Middle -earth with 
our own lives—or at least that is what I experienced at Enyalië 2023. By this I do 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  41 
not mean that I came to believe literally in the destruction of the One Ring and 
the fall of Sauron, any more than Tolkien believed in the Tale of Beren and 
Lúthien as a factual account of historical events.6 Rather, I became so immersed 
in the story -world—bodily, emotionally, imaginatively, symbolically —that 
sharp distinctions between “primary” and “secondary” no longer adequately 
described my engagement with it. Truth be told, I am not convinced that they 
ever did. 
 This brings me back to my as -yet unanswered question: what, if 
anything, do we encounter at Enyalië? Or to put it another way: what do we 
glimpse beyond the narrative frame? For the Roman Catholic Tolkien, it is an 
intimation of the Good News of Christian ity (OFS 77, cf. Letters 579, #328). 
Christian Tolkien commentators such as Paul E. Kerry (244), Alison Milbank 
(111–12), and Ralph Wood (275) would go further, viewing Middle -earth itself 
as a prism which refracts Christian truth, even to non -Christians who do not 
recognize its source. Within that framework, the question of what we encounter 
at Enyalië is not really a question: it is the God of Christianity, mediated to us 
by Tolkien’s legendarium. I would respond that if Tolkien had wanted his 
readers to only find Christian truth(s) in his fiction, he ought to have sub-created 
a world that was less open to interpretation (cf. Emanuel 47–48). For as much as 
it resembles one, Enyalië is not a Christian worship service; it is a fan ritual. The 
criterion for participation is not primary belief in a religious world but 
secondary belief in a fantasy world. The sub -creator of that world held certain 
religious views, but the readers who enter therein are in no way obligated to 
share them. We should hardly expect a fan ritual based on Middle-earth to leave 
any less room for interpretation than Middle-earth itself. 
Again: what do we encounter at Enyalië? Perhaps now I can give a 
proper answer —or better, several answers. We encounter Middle -earth and 
Tolkien its maker. We encounter one another, called together in this place by a 
shared love of these stories. And we encounter whatever intimation of “Joy, Joy 
beyond the walls of the world, poignant as grief” (OFS  75) it is that we 
experience when a story transcends its narrative frame and becomes our story—
as fans, as fellow-pilgrims, as (non)believers. We encounter, in short, the sacred 
as Gordon Lynch defines it, not as theological transcendence  but rather as that 
“gravitational pull on the feelings, motivations and behaviour of individuals 
and groups that [...] binds people into particular kinds of identities, communities 
and ways of living” (138). We need not pin a particular religious interpret ation 
to Enyalië, any more than we need pin a particular religious interpretation to 
 
6 Though it may be worth noting that Tolkien also appears not to have believed in the 
Garden of Eden, a central narrative of his own Christian tradition, as a factual account of 
historical events (Letters 158–159, #96). 
Tom Emanuel 
42  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
The Lord of the Rings . It is not a worship service; it has little need of formal 
doctrines. But it is a liturgy, a memorial, a collective worldbuilding practice of 
the community of fans who return to Tolkien’s grave year after year to celebrate 
his sub-creation and weave it more deeply into the fabric of our own lives. 
 
SENDING: AN ASPIRATIONAL CULTUS? 
Having wandered into the perilous realm where primary and 
secondary worlds touch, I would now like to take a step back and offer some 
important clarifications. Firstly, I want to re-emphasize that for the vast majority 
of readers, Tolkien fandom is not a religion in the same sense that, say, Islam or 
Sikhism or Eastern Orthodox Christianity would be. To be sure, there are 
individual cases where a fictional secondary world has, in fact, “absorbed” the 
primary world in Lindbeck’s sense. Markus Altena Davidsen’s aforementioned 
Tolkien religionists (31–32) are one example; Star Wars-inspired Jedis (Grant 39), 
Lovecraft spiritualists (Engle 85), and “Snapewives” in the Harry Potter fandom 
(Burton 64 –65) are three others. This is a marginal phenomenon in any fan 
community, however. I would wager that for most, The Silmarillion is no more a 
substitute for Holy Writ than Enyalië is a substitute for the Hajj. Viewing 
fandom as a simplistic “replacement apparatus” (Bickerdike 8) for religion is 
problematic for any numb er of reasons, but perhaps most obviously because 
many Tolkien fans, myself included, already belong to a religious tradition. Our 
love of Middle -earth—of any fictional story -world—exists alongside and in 
conversation with our faith (cf. Crome 413). The sa me goes for nonreligious 
readers, who might understandably bristle at being told that their fandom, 
however deeply felt, was “actually” religion in disguise (400–01). Fandom is less 
religious than religioid, Georg Simmel’s word to describe attitudes, affec ts, 
practices, and communities which reproduce religious forms without embracing 
religious content (Motak 112–14). 
Second, I want to acknowledge again that my definition of religion-as-
sacred-worldbuilding is a definition, not the definition. Drawing as it does on 
religious studies, fan studies, and fantasy studies alike, I submit that it enables 
us to better understand how worldbuilding contributes to the development of 
both religion and media fandom, which in turn enables us to unpick the religious 
affects, effects, and affordances of narrative worlds both sacred and secular. But 
other definitions will draw our attent ion to other important features and 
manifestations of the religious impulse in other cultures and eras. I have tried to 
be flexible and non -essentialist in constructing and applying my model, and I 
believe it has cross -cultural relevance. Yet I have relied  primarily on Western 
thinkers and frameworks to theorize a British fan organization’s Anglophone 
fan ritual, one which itself mirrors the form of Western Christian liturgy and is 
grounded in the works of a White, male, English, Roman Catholic author of the 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  43 
mid-twentieth century. Whether my analytical framework would hold up 
similarly well in non-Western contexts remains an open question. For example: 
in 2023, the journal Transformative Works and Cultures published a special issue 
wholly dedicated to fandom(s) in China. My intuition is that things might shape 
up rather differently in a country of 1.4 billion people, grounded in non -
Christian and non -Western cultural and religious traditions, officially 
communist yet deeply embedded in the global capitalist eco nomy. More work 
remains to be done. 
Third, I want to offer a caution to my fellow “secondary believers.” If 
Tolkien fandom is a secondary faith community as I have argued, then we must 
engage Tolkien’s story -world ethically and responsibly, just as Christians like 
myself must grapple with th e real tensions in our own tradition. Regarding 
controversy over the inclusion of dark -skinned Elves and Dwarves in Tolkien 
fanfic and fan art, Walls-Thumma writes: 
 
Again and again, what some fans thought Tolkien meant or believed he 
intended was elevated to the status of canon where it was not open to 
question and where canonicity became a convenient diversion from 
discussions of sexism, racism, and homophobia in the legendarium and 
fandom. (95) 
 
In many ways the Christian Bible is no different: powerful narratives of 
resurrection, liberation, and radical grace coexist alongside “texts of terror” 
which ecclesiastical authorities have weaponized to subjugate women and 
queer people for centuries (Trible 3, Bauer-Levesque 390). In a time when stories 
of all stripes are being wielded as cudgels against marginalized communities, 
we must confront the fact it is precisely the multivalent meanings of our stories 
and rituals which open them up them to noxiou s interpretations (Emanuel 47). 
It is incumbent upon us to actively build communities that are hospitable to as 
many different expressions of humanity as possible, in Tolkien fandom and 
beyond. 
Bearing these caveats in mind, however, I want to conclude with that 
openness to interpretation which I just mentioned. Even if the Tolkien Society is 
not the Church of Rome —even if Enyalië is not Easter Sunday —there is no 
denying that Tolkien’s stories of Middle-earth are profoundly moving to many 
people. In my ongoing research into the reception of The Lord of the Rings  
amongst twenty-first century readers, I am consistently struck by the depth of 
feeling with which people express their love and appreciat ion for Tolkien’s 
masterpiece. Likewise, even if fandom is not a replacement for religion per se, 
formal religious affiliation has been declining in the so -called “developed” 
world for decades. Political scientist Ryan Burge reports that 30 percent of 
Americans now describe themselves as nonreligious, the highest percentage 
Tom Emanuel 
44  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
ever (31). There are no signs that this downward trend of disaffiliation from 
traditional spiritual communities will stop anytime soon: among young Gen Z 
Americans, only 36 percent identify as Christian, in contrast to 48 percent who 
identify as atheist, a gnostic, or “nothing in particular” (83). In a very real way, 
Westerners like myself are living in a post -Christian world. Religion has not 
disappeared, of course. But as philosopher of secularity Charles Taylor writes, 
“a society in which it was virtually impossible not to believe in God” has given 
way “to one in which faith, even for the staunchest believer, is one human 
possibility among others” (3). Under such conditions, a person’s love of Tolkien 
might well prove an important tool for crafting identit y, finding community, 
and making meaning. It has certainly proven to be so for that bookish boy 
huddled in the graveyard up the road, obsessively rereading The Return of the 
King for the umpteenth time. 
In a pluralistic world of many faiths and no faiths, perhaps Enyalië can 
serve as an exemplar of a “post-Christian liturgy.” It draws upon familiar ritual 
technologies and the story -worlds that are already meaningful to people, 
offering a glimpse of “somet hing more” without needing to delimit or define 
the something in question. It cracks open “secondarily sacred” space in which 
individuals can meet and be moved but whose religious and ideological 
differences might otherwise prevent them from practicing alo ngside one 
another. Whatever a person’s ethical and metaphysical commitments regarding 
the primary world, there is nothing preventing them from finding common 
meaning in a secondary world. For there remains a key difference between 
religion and fandom, Tol kien’s misgivings notwithstanding. Religious 
practitioners (typically) consider the religious world and the primary world to 
be one and the same. Fans, on the other hand, (typically) proceed from the 
assumption that there is a boundary between the secondar y worlds of their 
favorite texts and the primary world —or perhaps I should say worlds—of 
everyday life. If I have accomplished nothing else, I hope to have shown that 
this boundary may be more porous than we have been led to believe. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abrahamson, Megan B. “J.R.R. Tolkien, Fanfiction, and ‘The Freedom of the 
Reader.’” Mythlore, vol. 32, no. 1, #123, 2013, pp. 55–74. 
Aden, Roger C. Popular Stories and Promised Lands: Fan Cultures and Symbolic 
Pilgrimages. Alabama UP, 1999.  
Amey, Evgenia. “The Search for the ‘Authentic’ in the Context of Narrative-Inspired 
Travel.” Journal of Narrative and Language Studies, vol. 6, no. 10, 2018, pp. 1–16. 
Ammerman, Nancy T. “On Things Seen and Unseen: Enlarging the Vision in 
Sociology of Religion.” Foundations and Futures in the Sociology of Religion, edited 
by Luke Doggett and Alp Arat, Routledge, 2018, pp. 101–14. 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  45 
Alberto, Maria. “‘It Had Been His Virtue, and Therefore Also the Cause of His Fall’: 
Seduction as a Mythopoeic Account for Evil in Tolkien’s Work.” Mythlore, vol. 
35, no. 2, #130, 2017, pp. 63–79. 
Asad, Talal. Genealogies of Religion: Discipline and Reasons of Power in Christianity and 
Islam. Johns Hopkins UP, 1993. 
Badone, Ellen and Sharon R. Roseman. “Approaches to the Anthropology of 
Pilgrimage and Tourism.” Intersecting Journeys: The Anthropology of Pilgrimage 
and Tourism, edited by Ellen Badone and Sharon R. Roseman, Illinois UP, 2004, 
pp. 1–23. 
Barker, Martin. Lord of the Rings Project Database . Aberystwyth University, 25 Jun e 
2008, Aberystwyth. https://doi.org/10.20391/b403222b-74b6-4686-9cc6-dfd1de1 
6a31a.  
—. The World Hobbit Project Database . Aberystwyth University, 18 Oct. 2017, 
Aberystwyth. https://doi.org/10.20391/aa40f8e7-00d3-45dd-b63b-e5da58168312. 
Barenblat, Rachel. “Transformative Work: Midrash and Fanfiction.” Religion and 
Literature, vol. 4, no. 2, 2011, pp. 171–77. 
Bauer-Levesque, Angela. “Jeremiah.” The Queer Bible Commentary , edited by Deryn 
Guest, Robert E. Goss, Mona West, and Thomas Bohache, SCM Press, 2006, pp. 
386–93. 
Barush, Kathryn. Imaging Pilgrimage: Art as Embodied Experience. Bloomsbury Visual 
Arts, 2021. 
Berger, Peter. The Sacred Canopy: Elements of a Sociological Theory of Religion. 
Doubleday, 1967.  
The Bible. New Revised Standard Version Updated Version, The New Oxford 
Annotated Bible with Apocrpyha, 5th ed., Oxford UP, 2018. 
Bickerdike, Jennifer Otter. The Secular Religion of Fandom. Sage Publishing, 2016.  
Bom, Anne Klara. “Where Fiction Really Exists: The Staging and Experience of 
Authenticity in the Literary Icon -City.” Aktuel forskning ved Institut for 
Litteratur, Kultur og Medier, vol. 9, no. 2, 2015, pp. 85–97. 
Brown, Lorraine. “Tourism and Pilgrimage: Paying Homage to Literary Heroes.” 
International Journal of Tourism Research, vol. 18, 2016, pp. 167–75. 
Buchmann, Anne, Kevin Moore, and David Fisher. “Experiencing Film Tourism: 
Authenticity and Fellowship.” Annals of Tourism Research , vol. 37, no.1, 2010, 
pp. 229–48. 
Burge, Ryan P. The Nones: Where They Came From, Who They Are, and Where They Are 
Going. 2nd ed., Fortress Press, 2023. 
Burton, Tara Isabella. Strange Rites: New Religions for a Godless World. PublicAffairs, 2020. 
Carls, Paul. “Émile Durkheim (1858 —1917).” The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 
https://iep.utm.edu/emile-durkheim/. Accessed 7 Nov. 2022. 
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. Houghton Mifflin, 2000.  
Cavicchi, Daniel. “Foundational Discourses of Fandom.” A Companion to Media 
Fandom and Fan Studies, edited by Paul Booth, John Wiley and Sons, 2018, pp. 
27–46. 
Tom Emanuel 
46  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
—. Tramps Like Us: Music and Meaning Among Springsteen Fans. Oxford UP, 1998. 
Cherry, Constance M. The Worship Architect: A Blueprint for Designing Culturally 
Relevant and Biblically Faithful Services. Baker Academic, 2010.  
Clark, Stuart and Rosie Clark. “Oxonmoot ‘74 Report.” Amon Hen vol. 13, 1974, pp. 6–13. 
Coker, Cait. “Fandom.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Stuart D. Lee, 2nd ed., 
John Wiley and Sons, 2022, pp. 525–34. 
Crome, Andrew. “Reconsidering Religion and Fandom: Christian Fan Works in the 
My Little Pony Fandom.” Culture and Religion, vol. 15, no. 4, 2014, pp. 399–418. 
Crossan, John Dominic. The Dark Interval: Toward a Theology of Story. Argus 
Communications, 1975. 
Davidsen, Markus Altena. “Honouring the Valar, Seeking the Elf Within: The 
Curious History of Tolkien Spirituality and the Religious Affordance of 
Tolkien’s Literary Mythology.” Tolkien the Pagan? Reading Middle-earth through 
a Spiritual Lens: The Proceedings of Tolkien Society Seminar 2018, edited by Anna 
Milon, Luna Press Publishing, 2019, pp. 31–45. 
de Kloet, Jeroen and Giselinde Kuipers. “Spirituality and Fan Culture around the 
Lord of the Rings Film Trilogy.” Fabula, vol. 48, no. 3/4, 2007, pp. 300–19.  
Duffett, Mark. Understanding Fandom: An Introduction to the Study of Media Fan 
Culture. Bloomsbury Academic, 2013. 
Elliott, Michael A. “Fandom as Religion: A Social -Scientific Assessment.” Journal of 
Fandom Studies, vol. 9, no. 2, 2021, pp. 107–22.  
Emanuel, Tom. “‘It Is ‘About’ Nothing But Itself’: Tolkienian Theology Beyond the 
Domination of the Author.” Mythlore, vol. 42, no. 1, #143, 2023, pp. 29–53. 
Engle, John. “Cults of Lovecraft: The Impact of H.P. Lovecraft’s Fiction on 
Contemporary Occult Practices.” Mythlore, vol. 33, no. 1, #125, 2014, 85–98. 
“Enyalië.” The Tolkien Society , https://www.tolkiensociety.org/society/events 
/oxonmoot/enyalie/. Accessed 6 June 2024. 
Flieger, Verlyn. “The Arch and the Keystone.” Mythlore, vol. 38, no. 1, #131, 2019, pp. 7–19.  
—. “Tolkien’s Lúthien: From Life to Art to Life as Art.” Mythlore, vol. 41, no. 1, #145, 
2024, pp. 234–40. 
Glaubman, Jane. Deplorable Cultus: Populism, Globalization, and The Lord of the Rings . 
2019. Cornell University, PhD dissertation. 
Goh, Robbie B.H. “ The Lord of the Rings and New Zealand: Fantasy Pilgrimages, 
Imaginative Transnationalism and the Semiotics of the (Ir)Real.” Social 
Semiotics, vol. 24, no. 3, 2014, pp. 263–82. 
Grant, Rhiannon. “Doctrine and Fandom: George Lindbeck, Han’s Gun and 
Sherlock’s Gay Wedding.” The Sacred in Fantastic Fandom: Essays on the 
Intersection of Religion and Pop Culture , edited by Carole M . Cusack, John W. 
Morehead, and Venetia Laura Delano Robertson, McFarland, 2019, pp. 33–48. 
Hannell, Briony. Feminist Fandom: Media Fandom, Digital Feminisms, and Tumblr. 
Bloomsbury, 2023. 
Hills, Matt. Fan Cultures. Routledge, 2002.  
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  47 
Jenkins, Henry. Fans, Bloggers, and Gamers: Exploring Participatory Culture. New York 
UP, 2006. 
—. Textual Poachers: Television Fans and Participatory Culture. Routledge, 1992. 
—. “Transmedia Storytelling 101.” Confessions of an ACA Fan, 21 Mar . 2017. 
http://henryjenkins.org/blog/2007/03/transmedia_storytelling_101.html/. 
Accessed 13 Feb. 2024. 
Kerry, Paul E. “Tracking Catholic Influence in The Lord of the Rings.” The Ring and the 
Cross: Christianity and the Lord of the Rings , edited by Paul E. Kerry, Farleigh 
Dickinson UP, 2011, pp. 234–245. 
Jindra, Michael. “ Star Trek  to Me is a Way of Life: Fan Expressions of Star Trek  
Philosophy.” Star Trek and Sacred Ground: Explorations of Star Trek, Religion, and 
American Culture, edited by Jennifer E. Porter and Darcee L. McLaren, SUNY 
UP, 1999, pp. 217–30. 
Leonard, Candy. “Beatles Fandom: A De Facto Religion.” Fandom and the Beatles: The 
Act You’ve Known for All These Years , edited by Kenneth Womack and Kit 
O’Toole, Oxford UP, 2021, pp. 19–54. 
Lindbeck, George. The Nature of Doctrine: Religion and Theology in a Postliberal Age. The 
Westminster Press, 1984.  
Lovell, Jane and James Thurgill. “Extending Hot Authentication: Imagining Fantasy 
Space.” Annals of Tourism Research, vol. 87, 2021, pp. 1–16. 
Lukić, Mina and Dejan Vukelić. “Tolkien’s Grave as a Site of Memory.”  Twenty-First 
Century Reception of Tolkien: Proceedings of the Tolkien Society Winter Seminar 
2021, edited by Will Sherwood, Luna Press Publishing, 2022, pp. 58–88.  
Lyden, John C. “Whose Film Is It, Anyway? Canonicity and Authority in Star Wars 
Fandom.” Journal of the American Academy of Religion  vol. 80, no. 3, 2012, pp. 
775–86. 
Lynch, Gordon. “What Is This ‘Religion’ in the Study of Religion and Popular 
Culture?” Between Sacred and Profane: Researching Religion and Popular Culture, 
edited by Gordon Lynch, I.B. Tauris, 2007, pp. 125–42.  
Mandair, Arvind -Pal and Markus Dressler. “Introduction: Modernity, Religion -
Making, and the Postsecular.” Secularism and Religion -Making, edited by 
Markus Dressler and Arvind-Pal S. Mandair, Oxford UP, 2011, pp. 3–36. 
Metz, Johann Baptist. Faith in History and Society. Translated by J. Matthew Ashley, 
Crossroad Publishing, 2011.  
McDannell, Colleen. “Scrambling the Sacred and Profane.” Religion, Media and 
Culture: A Reader, edited by Gordon Lynch, Jolyon Mitchell, and Ann Strhan, 
Taylor and Francis, 2011, pp. 135–46. 
McGuire, Meredith B. Lived Religion: Faith and Practice in Everyday Life . Oxford UP, 
2008. 
Middleton, Darren J.N. “Dead Serious: A Theology of Literary Pilgrimage.” 
CrossCurrents, vol. 59, no. 3, 2009, pp. 300–18. 
Milbank, Allison. Chesterton and Tolkien as Theologians: The Fantasy of the Real. T and T 
Clark, 2007. 
Tom Emanuel 
48  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Motak, Dominika. “Georg Simmel’s Concept of Religion and Religiosity.” Studia 
Religiogica, vol. 45, no. 2, 2012, pp. 109–15. 
Okamoto, Ryosuke. Pilgrimages in the Secular Age: From El Camino to Anime. 
Translated by Deborah Iwabuchi and Enda Kazuko, Japan Publishing Industry 
Foundation for Culture, 2019. 
Pande, Rukmini. “Squee from the Margins: Racial/Cultural/Ethnic Identity on Global 
Media Fandom.” Seeing Fans: Representations of Fandom in Media and Popular 
Culture, edited by Lucy Bennett and Paul Booth, Bloomsbury Academic, 2016, 
pp. 209–20. 
Porter, Jennifer. “Implicit Religion in Popular Culture: The Religious Dimensions of 
Fan Communities.” Implicit Religion, vol. 12, no. 3, 2009, pp. 271–80. 
Reid, Robin A. “How Queer Atheists, Agnostics, and Animists Engage with Tolkien’s 
Legendarium.” Tolkien and Diversity: Proceedings of the Tolkien Society Summer 
Seminar 2021, edited by Will Sherwood, Luna Press Publishing, 2023, pp. 52 –
85. 
Robertson, Venetia Laura Delano. “Magical Matrimony: Romance and Enchantment 
in Harry Potter–Themed Weddings.” The Sacred in Fantastic Fandom: Essays on 
the Intersection of Religion and Pop Culture, edited by Carole M Cusack, John W. 
Morehead, and Venetia Laura Delano Robertson: McFarland, 2019, pp. 169–86. 
Saler, Michael. As If: Modern Enchantment and the Literary Prehistory of Virtual Reality. 
Oxford UP, 2012.  
Stanfill, Mel. “Straighten Up and Fly White: Whiteness, Heteronormativity, and the 
Representation of Happy Endings for Fans.” Seeing Fans: Representations of 
Fandom in Media and Popular Culture , edited by Lucy Bennett and Paul Booth, 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2016, pp. 187–195. 
Sturgis, Amy. “Reimagining Rose: Portrayals of Tolkien’s Rosie Cotton in Twenty -
First Century Fan Fiction.” Mythlore, vol. 24, no. 3, #133/134, 2006, pp. 165–87. 
Taylor, Charles. A Secular Age. Belknap Press of Harvard UP, 2007.  
Thomas, Ebony Elizabeth and Amy Stornaiuolo. “Race, Storying, and Restorying: 
What Can We Learn from Black Fans?” Fans of Color, Fandoms of Color , special 
issue of Transformative Works and Cultures , edited by Abigail De Kosnik and 
andré carrington, vol. 29, 2019, https://dx.doi.org/10.3983/twc.2019.1562. 
Tolkien, J.R.R . The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien , edited by Humphrey Carpenter & 
Christopher Tolkien, 2nd edition, Houghton Mifflin, 2023.  
—. The Lord of the Rings. 50th Anniversary ed., Houghton Mifflin, 2004.  
—. “On Fairy-stories.” Tolkien On Fairy-stories, Expanded Edition, with Commentary and 
Notes, edited by Verlyn Flieger and Douglas A. Anderson, HarperCollins, 2008, 
pp. 27–84.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. and Donald Swann. The Road Goes Ever On . 3 rd ed., HarperCollins, 
2002. 
Trible, Phyllis. Texts of Terror: Literary-Feminist Readings of Biblical Narratives. Fortress 
Press, 1984. 
An Aspirational Cultus? Tolkien Fandom at the Borders of Belief 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  49 
Turner, Victor. “Liminality and Communitas.” Foundations in Ritual Studies: A Reader 
for Students of Christian Worship , edited by Paul Bradshaw and John Melloh, 
SPCK, 2007, pp. 73–85.  
Viars, Karen and Cait Coker. “Constructing Lothíriel: Rewriting and Rescuing the 
Women of Middle-earth from the Margins.” Mythlore, vol. 33, no. 2, #126, 2015, 
pp. 35–48. 
Wagner, Rachel. Godwired: Religion, Ritual and Virtual Reality. Routledge, 2012. 
Walls-Thumma, Dawn M. “Stars Less Strange: An Analysis of Fanfiction and 
Representation within the Tolkien Fan Community.” Tolkien and Diversity: 
Proceedings of the Tolkien Society Summer Seminar 2021, edited by Will Sherwood, 
Luna Press Publishing, 2023, pp. 86–106.  
Wolf, Mark J.P. Building Imaginary Worlds: The Theory and History of Subcreation. 
Taylor & Francis, 2012.  
Wood, Ralph C. “Tolkien and Postmodernism.” Tolkien Among the Moderns , edited 
by Ralph C. Wood, University of Notre Dame Press, 2015, pp. 246–277. 
Woodhead, Linda. “Secularisation: With Added Agency.” Foundations and Futures in 
the Sociology of Religion, edited by Luke Doggett and Alp Arat, Routledge, 2018, 
pp. 55–67. 
Zubernis, Lynn and Katherine Larsen. “Make Space for Us! Fandom in the Real 
World.” A Companion to Media Fandom and Fan Studies , edited by Paul Booth, 
John Wiley and Sons, 2018, pp. 145–60. 
 
THE REV. TOM EMANUEL is a theologian and doctoral researcher with the University 
of Glasgow’s Centre for Fantasy and the Fantastic. His current project explores the 
reception of J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings among nonreligious readers and is 
funded by an Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) doctoral partnership 
with the Scottish Graduate School of Arts and Humanities (SGSAH). His work has 
appeared in the  Journal of Tolkien Research, Mallorn, Mythlore, Tolkien Studies, and 
Zeitschrift für Fantastikforschung. Tom is an ordained minister in the United Church 
of Christ and lives in Glasgow with his spouse and their two children, whom they 
are already inducting into the “deplorable cultus” of Tolkien fandom. 
 
 
 

  
 
  
 

  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  51 
 
 
                IVINITY  AND THE VOID IN CHINESE AND  
                     THAI TRANSLATIONS OF THE AINULINDALË  
 
                                           ERIC REINDERS  
 
OLKIEN’S WORK HAS BECOME A GLOBAL PHENOMENON , and I argue for more 
attention to readings outside of English. What new readings of his texts 
emerge from placing them in the contexts of different languages, such as in this 
case Mandarin Chinese or Thai? I want to think of these stories circulating 
globally.  
This is not a question of what the author may have intended, but of 
how the stories are perceived and re -told. The canonicity of the original is 
immutable, but millions of fans can’t read the original, except through a 
translation. My approach is to treat the translations as stories in their own right, 
and then to try to articulate some of these alternatives into my native tongue. It 
is in multiple translations of the same source text that we begin to see Tolkien’s 
works as a kind of narrative tradition of greater complexity than that of any 
single book in one’s native language —especially if it’s under copyright. 
Everyone’s first reading of The Lord of the Rings —even if it is not in English —
remains foundational in any subsequent reading; and disputes over 
interpretation quickly become disputes over translations. Translation is a precise, 
linguistically intimate exchange of meaning, and I hope that a focus on these rich 
negotiations of meaning might contribute to a larger project of a comparative 
study of the imagination. I am looking at Mandarin Chinese and Thai simply 
because these are within my own ability, and I genuinely encourage studies 
adding to the existing literature on Tolkien’s works in all its many languages. 
Looking at two different languages, and  at multiple translations in the same 
language, provides the opportunity to shift perspective and make more complex 
comparisons.  
Previous studies of Tolkien in translation have dealt primarily with 
Western translations —such as Tolkien Through Russian Eyes  (2003), Tolkien in 
Translation (2011) and a number of articles and chapters. Here I want to expand 
that comparative scope. The scholarship has (in my view) tended to focus on a 
qualitative evaluation of fidelity. If we imagine translation primarily in terms of 
a transfer of semantic content, our questions tend to be about fidelity, the degree 
to which the translation has replicated or “captured” the precise meaning of the 
original text, including all of its nuances. But taken literally, this is to put 
translation in an unwinnable battle with itself, since in fact no two words ever 
mean exactly the same thing. Instead, current work in  translation theory, such 
T 
Eric Reinders 
52  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
as that of Emmerich (2017), Venuti (2019), and Briggs (2017), has emphasized 
the creativity of new re-tellings.  
Though Tolkien was cautious about translations of his own work, his 
discussion of story -telling in “On Fairy -stories” supports the view that two 
“versions” of the “same story” are to be considered each in their own right, not 
only as an “original” and subsequent “derivatives.” Though it would be quixotic 
to deny the actual sequence of publication, I set aside the hierarchy of original and 
translations, in order to consider translated texts as circulations of the 
imagination, as elaborations of a mythos, and  as intercultural exchange. 
Although a translator might simply misread the original, for the most part we 
are dealing with varying interpretations, expressions of translators’ individual 
and idiosyncratic understandings. Fidelity is certainly a valid conce rn, but it is 
not the only concern.  
To reveal to English -readers some of what is happening in the 
translated texts, I use a literalistic style of back -translation, combined with 
annotation and discussion. While no two words can ever mean exactly the same 
thing, we easily recognize degrees of proximity. One translation may represent 
the original’s words in a relatively literal way, while another is less “faithful” but 
communicates what we perceive as the intention of the story more accurately. 
In the one case the text is relatively foreignized (by its inclusion of phrases 
deemed strange in the target language); in another case the text is relatively 
domesticated (by its use of idioms which diverge from the source text but are 
meaningful in the target language). This contrast is also known as formal vs. 
dynamic translation, or source-language-oriented and target-language-oriented 
translations. In making this contrast, I emphasize “relatively,” because although 
absolute literalism in a translation is simply impossible, and absolute 
domestication would no longer be considered a translation at all; yet on a case -
by-case basis we can still see the relative distinctions quite clearly. Back -
translation leans heavily towards the formal, source -language-oriented, and 
foreignizing style. One caveat is that these back -translations should not be 
mistaken for good or finished translations. In order to evoke in Engl ish what is 
happening in the Chinese or Thai, my back-translations are often awkward and 
ungrammatical, which of course is not true of the Chinese and Thai texts.  
In Reading Tolkien in Chinese: Religion, Fantasy and Translation  (2024), 
using the original and three Chinese translations, I explored a variety of themes, 
including the afterlife and fate. One theme I did not address in that study was 
cosmogony, primarily described in the Ainulindalë and Valaquenta. Here I 
examine a 2001 translation by Li Yao for the Yilin Press, a 2002 translation by 
Deng Jiawan (Joy Teng), and her 2015 revised translation —that is, two 
translations by the same translator. And to this list  I can add a 2010 Thai 
translation by Thida Thanyaprasertkul. For ease of reference, these works will 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  53 
be cited by translator, name of text, and page number; and in the case of the two 
Silmarillions translated by Deng, with the year of publication added.  
Firstly, the titles. In the Chinese translations, The Silmarillion  is 
paraphrased as “the elves’ jewels.” Jingling baozuan 精靈寶鑽/ 精灵宝钻. In the 
Yilin edition, there is an added prefix, Mojie qiyuan 魔戒起源 (“The Beginning of 
The Magic Ring ”); mojie is the general name for the whole franchise. So the 
Chinese title is a gloss rather than a transliteration of “The Silmarillion.” In the 
text, the word “Silmaril” is transliterated as Xi-ermali-er 熙尔玛利尔, or Ximali-er 
茜玛丽尔 but more often jingling baozuan, “the elves’ j ewels” is used. The Thai 
title is not precisely The Silmarillion either, but: ต ำนำนแห่งซิลมำริล Tamnaan haeng 
Sinmarin, “legend of the Silmarils” which tells us something of the text’s genre, 
and transliterates Silmaril as Sinmarin. (In Thai, the ‘l’ sound in final position 
within a syllable such as ‘sil’ is converted to an ‘n’ sound.)  
As for the Ainulindalë, Li retitles this text simply as Airu (i.e. Eru, the 
name of Ilúvatar), though the Valaquenta is given as “the legend of the Valar 
(Fanla de chuanshuo ).” For the Ainulindalë, Deng uses Ainu de da yuezhang  
埃努的大樂章 (the great musical movement of the Ainur). For Valaquenta, Weila 
benji (the annals of the Valar); benji is usually used for royal annals, pertaining 
to the deeds of an emperor. In her revised translation, the Ainulindalë is retitled 
Chuangshilu 创世录 (record of the creation of the world). The Thai translation 
simply renders Ainulindalë and Valaquenta phonetically.  
In examining these multiple versions, I am looking specifically for 
instances where something stands out as different—not in error but assuming a 
conscientious effort to translate well. In the case of these cosmogonic narratives, 
the first line in the original and in translations gives us some different senses of 
the name Eru, and of Eru’s pronouns, and therefore the nature of Eru. Slightly 
further in the narrative we find what I consider to be some intriguingly different 
connotations of the Void.  
 
THE FIRST LINE 
The Ainulindalë begins with a disembodied unity creating a series of 
successively less powerful and more physical beings. The first generation of 
such beings manifests as musical notes, which form chords, and hence harmony, 
complexity, and inevitably discord. Vision is created to express that music, and 
then the materialization of that vision is the world. The world is then populated. 
We are presented with a descent from spirit to matter, from unity to multiplicity 
and specificity. The Valar, the elves, the n humans (or as Tolkien called them, 
“Men”), then dwarves, orcs. There are a few quirks to this descent. Against the 
divine plan, dwarves were created before elves, but Ilúvatar put them to sleep. 
Also, we don’t hear about animals or bacteria, but the general sequence is clear. 
As with all mythologies, certain obvious questions are unanswered.  
Eric Reinders 
54  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
In drawing a continuous narrative line from the very beginning of 
everything to the Fourth Age under the “dominion of Men,” the entire oeuvre 
moves from a high mythological register to chronicles in historical time. There 
are several markers of this descent. We note the shift in tone from The Silmarillion 
to The Hobbit. The thinning of the elves is also a transition from myth to history. 
Or perhaps the Valar themselves might represent a kind of pivot: initially very 
active, then gradually disappearing from the story. Even early on, they could 
take form, or not. We read that their taking form is a kind of clothing or disguise. 
The Vala Ulmo “will seldom clothe himself in a body after the manner of his 
peers” (Silmarillion [Silm.] 17). Li gives us an overly literalistic “seldom wears 
clothes like his peers” (Li Silm. 17), which suggests that Ulmo is usually naked. 
Deng has, Ulmo “very rarely like [his] peers puts on a flesh -body form 
(肉身的形體 roushen de xingti )” (Deng Silm. 2002 19). The Thai: “He ( phra-ong) 
does not like to walk on the land, and does not like wearing a body (rang, figure) 
disguise ( jamlaeng) such as the other devas ( thep, gods) prefer” 
(Thanyaprasertkul Silm. 56).  
The opening phrase from the Ainulindalë is: “There was Eru, the One, 
who in Arda is called Ilúvatar” ( Silm. 3). Li has “ 惟一者” 
埃如,在阿尔达王国被叫做伊路瓦塔” (Li Silm. 3). Back -translated, this is: “‘The 
only one’ Airu, in the A-er-da royal domain is called Yi-lu-wa-ta.” The phrase “the 
only one” is in quotation marks for some reason, perhaps to suggest whatever 
the capitalization of “One” suggests, such as that “the One” is a title or name, 
not merely “there was just the one of him.” Notice also the active verbs: this 
version reduces the sense of beginning the story at the start (“There was . . . ”), 
instead starting with a naming (“. . . is called . . . ”).  
Deng’s two versions have almost the same basic text. “始有一如, 
‘独一之神’, 其名在世界間稱為伊露維塔.” “In the beginning was yiru, ‘the only 
god,’ its name in the world ( shijian) was yi-lu-wei-ta” (Deng Silm. 2002, 3). This 
2002 edition has a series of footnotes on key terms (or rather, sidenotes, since as 
a vertical text they appear to the left of the page, not at the bottom. The sidenotes 
were imported into the body of the text, parenthetically, in the 2015 version). For 
example, after yiru, Deng gives the term in Roman lett ers, notes that it is a 
Quenya word, and gives a general description of that deity. For the 2015 
publication, she changed the paraphrase of Arda as “the world” to a 
transliteration (a-er-da 阿尔达) (Deng 2015 Silm. 31). In both cases, for “the One,” 
Deng gives us duyi zhi shen  (the only god). In this context it is clear that shen 
should be “god,” though the word 神shen can also mean a spirit, or 
consciousness, or soul. Since Chinese does not have capital letters, there is no 
distinction between “god” and “God.” Shen might also be plural, though here 
the context makes it clear we are talking about a singular god, not gods.  
 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  55 
THE NAME ERU  
The first thing to note here is the differences of dealing with the proper 
name Eru. The Chinese script is in the form of characters. All characters have 
meanings, however obscure, but certain characters are customarily used for 
transliteration. Phrases transliterated into Mandarin Chinese have a distinctive 
look. Li gives Eru as 埃如 airu, and these characters are fairly commonly used in 
transliteration, so I think readers would immediately perceive it as a proper 
noun, despite the lack of capitalization in Chinese. In English, if the text said, 
“There was eru,” we might be slightly confus ed, but with the capital E, we 
accept that “Eru” is the name of “the One,” a proper noun, and we do not 
therefore try to find “eru” in a dictionary, or wonder if it is a typo. In itself, “Eru” 
does not mean anything outside of Tolkien’s usage (Halsall 31 –32). But what is 
the meaning of Li’s airu? Ai means dust, but it is often used in transliterations—
such as the first syllable of the Chinese for Eiffel Tower, Exxon Corporation, 
emir, and Ethiopia. Ru 如 has a range of meanings related to if, as if, like, eq ual, 
for example, thus, and according to. It is not commonly used for transliterating 
names beginning with Ru–. Nonetheless, again, airu closely resembles in sound 
the original Eru, easily perceived, in Chinese as in English, as a proper noun but 
not much else. I doubt anyone would read it as “dust-like.”  
Here, though, we see a fascinating move by Deng: she chose characters 
closely resembling the sound of Eru —yiru—but these characters have potent 
meanings. Yi is “one,” and combined with ru we get: 一如 (yiru). In a Buddhist 
context, yiru is a literary term for absolute reality, the “one thusness,” a synonym 
of zhenru (“true thusness,” namely, reality as it “really is like”); the nondual 
whole of existence, in contrast with our fragmenting perceptions. In saying that 
ultimate reality is like what it is like, one is reminded of the phrase, “it is what it 
is,” or even Exodus 3.14, where God says to Moses, “I am who I am” or “I am 
that I am,” though the Buddhist “thu sness” is certainly not meant in a theistic 
sense. At least for those readers with some knowledge of Buddhist philosophy, 
yiru then belongs to a register of place -markers for a non -dual ultimate reality 
beyond words. For readers without such knowledge, it would still have a certain 
metaphysical or spiritual sound. This yi一is not common in transliteration, 
where yi 伊, yi 以, or yi 意 are more common (as in Iran, Israel, and Italy).  
Starting from a strong assertion of the limits of language, Buddhist 
philosophers developed a vocabulary for talking about reality while avoiding 
the pitfalls of saying too much about it —this is the idea of language as the 
“finger pointing to the moon.” Yiru is a descriptor or label for ultimate reality, 
which posits that reality is non-dual (yi, one), and furthermore “like that” or “is 
what it is” (ru). Yiru is thus a name for the fundamental nature of reality here and 
now, much like Buddhist emptiness. The idea of emptiness does not say that 
things simply don’t exist, but rather they don’t exist in themselves. In a Buddhist 
Eric Reinders 
56  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
sense the term does not refer to a creator god, because the true nature of reality 
does not have such things as intentions, desires, or individual consciousness, so 
perhaps this choice makes the cosmogony slightly less theistic. But if so, only 
momentarily—as the story goes on, Eru sees, speaks, and makes, like a god.  
Since Thai is phonetic, the Thai translation gives us a rather different 
linguistic phenomenon: “A long time ago, there was eru the one who is one 
(พระผู้เป็นหนึ่ง phra pu pen neung ) who was called in the arda world iluwata” 
(Thanyaprasertkul Silm. 39). Pu pen neung is literally “person who is one.” Phra 
is an honorific prefix for various sacred persons, most commonly monks but also 
gods. As with Chinese, lacking the definite article and capital letters, simply to 
say “the One” would sound like just “one” and not make much sense, hence this 
more formal ph rasing. Phra is followed in the next line by the use of พระองค์ 
phra-ong, combining the sacred-honorific phra with ong, the Thai count noun for 
sacred objects; phra-ong becomes a pronoun, putting Ilúvatar in the class of gods, 
kings, Buddhas and Buddha -images. (For a sense of how count nouns work, 
think of “one piece of paper,” “two pairs of trousers,” etc.) 
In the course of the Southward migration of the Tai peoples, they 
adapted a Khmer script for their writing, a script which is phonetic in nature. 
The language absorbed vocabulary of Indic origin, which is now particularly 
visible in the jargons of royalty and Buddhism. Monarchs of the current dynasty 
for example are known as พระรำม Phra-raam the first, the second, etc.—in other 
words the Hindu deity Rama. This distinctive honorific or “royal” language 
(raajasap) is not merely a set of specialized terms but a series of different lexical 
registers. In English we can say “The King ate breakfast” and “the dog ate 
breakfast” using the same verb; in Thai there are entirely different terms for 
various social contexts. In the third paragraph of the Ainulindalë, Ilúvatar “said” 
such-and-such; in Thai the verb is trat ฅรัส which is only used for royalty or 
deities. Of course English is capable of distinguishing such things: though 
Tolkien used a simple “said,” we might say a god like Ilúvatar “pronounced” or 
“declaimed,” but these do not approach the systematic, specific hierarchies of 
Thai royal language. Consistently the Thai uses verbs in raajasap, for Ilúvatar 
and the Valar: trat for speak, ถวำย tawai for give, and so on. The text also uses 
เทพ thep (a Thai pronunciation of the Sanskrit word deva, meaning “god”) as a 
prefix before the proper names of Valar: the deva Ulmo, the deva Mandos. This 
is entirely natural in Thai, but now, we might return to the English and find “he” 
and “said” rather flat. Almost disrespectful. In English as in Thai, we l earn of 
Ilúvatar’s divine nature semantically (through what is said of Him), but the Thai 
adds a layer of lexical distinction, which sounds like something you would hear 
in a temple, or a palace.  
 
 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  57 
HE AND HE  
It came to pass, “he made first the Ainur, the Holy Ones, that were the 
offspring of his thought, and they were with him before aught else was made. 
And he spoke to them, propounding to them themes of music; and they sang 
before him, and he was glad” ( Silm. 3). In the original, Ilúvatar has a male 
pronoun. Let us set aside the complex theological question and cultural history 
of gendering something like the Christian God or the cosmic and formless 
Ilúvatar, and instead observe that “he” is a lower-case pronoun. Surely Ilúvatar 
deserves a He?  
Neither Chinese nor Thai have capital letters, so the distinction 
between “He” and “he” is either invisible, or must be dealt with in other ways. 
Li gives us: “he (ta 他) first made the “holy worthies” [or sages, shengxian] a-yi-
nuo. These ‘holy worthies’ were all born from what his heart -mind thought. 
Before other people were created, there were only them and him together. 
Ilúvatar and they spoke of many things [ tantian shuodi, talked of heaven and 
spoke of earth ], and he gave them musical themes; and so th ey sang for him 
songs, he was very happy” (Li Silm. 3). The third-person pronoun ta 他 is either 
gender-neutral or male, or ambiguously both, because it is a default ungendered 
pronoun for people in general, much like the now -outdated use of “he” or 
“man” for people in general. And yet, ta 他 is in contrast with ta 她, “she,” a 
character never used for males. So with Li’s translation the male gender is 
implicit, easily assumed, strongly implied. But again the “he” here (ta 他 ) is the 
exact same pronoun as any other, non-divine “he” (ta 他 ).  
Deng however uses another variation: “It (ta 祂) first made from [Its] 
own thought many ai-nu, ‘the sacred envoys’ ( shensheng de shizhe ), they were 
before the myriad things were made and were with It. It spoke to them, It 
proposed to them the topics of song ( 樂曲的主題 yuequ de zhuti ). So before It, 
they loudly sang, which made It completely happy” (Deng Silm. 2002 3). In her 
later translation, she changed “ the sacred envoys” to “ holy ones ( shenshengzhe 
神圣者)” (Deng Silm. 2015, 31).  
Deng uses a less common variant of the third person pronoun, ta 祂 
rather than the more common ta 他 as Li uses. They are pronounced the same 
(just as “He” and “he” are pronounced the same), but ta 祂 has a radical 
component which indicates it is used for gods. Since Tolkien gendered Ilúvatar 
male, it makes sense to read ta 祂 in this line as male, but whereas “he” is always 
male, ta 祂 is not particularly gender -specific. This is why I have translated 祂 
as “It,” despite the discourtesy of calling someone (let alone a god) “It.” Still, this 
pronoun choice presents a lexical analogue of the typographic distinction 
“He/he.” In a larger frame, it does raise the question of why Tolkien did not use 
Eric Reinders 
58  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
“He,” since Ilúvatar is obviously a fictional analogue of the Christian God —
perhaps it was intended to create a little distance between Ilúvatar and the 
Christian God. In Deng’s translations there is no such issue —she used the 
pronoun for a God.  
The Thai version similarly resists the absent capitalization of Ilúvatar’s 
pronoun though a lexical choice of phra-ong. Back-translating this particular phra-
ong, I would either use a literalistic “the holy one,” or given the context, “He.”  
Capitalization of deities is not a trivial matter, as shown by a 
remarkable example from a Russian translation. Nataliya Rakhmanova 
systematically turned phrases in which a deity is implied, such as “Bless me,” 
into explicit terms: “God bless me.” (Ferré et al note a similar pattern in French 
translations; 55). But as Mark Hooker writes, “At the time that she did her 
translation, God was a sensitive word to Soviet editors and censors. It was never 
spelled with a capital “G”, unless it began a sentence” (71) . Some translators 
even contrived to put the word always at the start of the sentence so that it 
would be capitalized, and censors contrived to move the word later in the 
sentence so it would not be capitalized (71).  
 
BUDDHIST CONNOTATIONS OF THE VOID  
How do the translations speak of what is not Ilúvatar—not created by 
Ilúvatar, namely: the Void? The melodies filled up the space of Ilúvatar, “and 
the music and the echo of the music went out into the Void, and it was not void” 
(Silm. 4). Li has: “The music and its echo flowed out into the void [空虚 kongxu], 
and thereby the world was not again void [ kongxu]” (Li Silm. 4). When the 
original says, “the Void, and it was not void” ( Silm. 4), we have the term as 
nominal and adjectival, with and without the definite article, with and without 
capitalization. Since Chinese does not have capitalization, there i s no parallel 
typographic way to distinguish between Void and void. For both, Li uses 
kongxu, which is also both nominal and adjectival. Deng uses kongxu and kong, 
but frames them more explicitly. She renders it as: “this movement [in the 
musical sense: 樂章 yuezhang, music -chapter] and its echo floated into ‘the 
domain of emptiness’ (kongxu zhi jing), and yet it was not empty (不是空的 bushi 
kong de)” (Deng Silm. 2002 4. 2015 32 is very similar). As a “domain,” the first 
use is clearly nominal and spatial, where as the construction bushi . . . de  clearly 
marks the second usage as an adjective. Deng creates a lexical solution to the 
puzzle of the unrepresentable typographic distinction.  
The Thai translation for Void involves the word สุญ soon (zero, empty). 
The music “went out to struggle with empty space ( สุญภูมิ soonpumi), which at 
this time was not vacant and empty ( ว่ำงสุญ wangsoon) again.” 
(Thanyapratertkul Silm. 40). The Thai translation differentiates them by using 
the nominal soonpumi (empty-place or zero -place) and a more abstract 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  59 
compound wangsoon (empty-zero or empty-empty). Similarly, in translating “it 
seemed to him that Ilúvatar took no thought for the Void, and he was impatient 
of its emptiness” ( Silm. 4), the Thai gives “the Void” as soonpumi, though 
“emptiness” here is ควำมว่ำงเปล่ำ khwam wangplao, very literally “empty -ness” 
or “nothing-ness” (Thanyaprasertkul Silm. 41). There is an etymological lineage 
here: Thai soon is derived from Pali suñña, itself derived from Sanskrit śūnya, the 
abstract noun of which is suññatā in Pali (more widely known by the Sanskrit 
śūnyatā), and usually translated as the Buddhist term “emptiness.” Soonpumi 
also uses the Sanskrit -derived bhūmi (place). In Thailand, Buddhist 
philosophical terms tend to be derived from texts in the scriptural language Pali. 
In “the Void, and it was not void,” the endless emptiness is given a 
proper noun status, where small -v void means only empty. In Li’s translation, 
the Chinese term for both of these is kongxu. Deng uses kongxu for the noun, and 
kong for the adjective. Kong in particular has strong Buddhist associations, 
namely the Chinese translation of śūnyatā, “emptiness.” Some translators of 
Buddhist sutras or ideas into English have rendered śūnyatā as the Void, though 
this usage has fallen out of fashion. The use of Ch inese kong or Thai soon does 
not mean the story is necessarily read as Buddhist, however. Though kong has a 
Buddhist resonance, it also just means, empty. As in: empty bowl, empty room. 
Besides, the Buddhist idea of emptiness implies, whatever might be in the bowl, 
it and the bowl itself  are both empty —that is, have no independent essential 
existence—an entirely different point. Furthermore, the Buddhist rhetoric of 
“the emptiness of emptiness” asserts that in Buddhist terms emptiness is not a 
Being in itself. In Christianity there is an interesting parallel history of the 
theology of Nothingness (see Harrison).  
For Tolkien, is the Void a Being in itself? Tolkien gives us some clues 
about the surrounding absence. Darkness is sometimes the mere absence of 
light, but when capitalized it is a thing in itself. We see the same pattern with 
Light/light: “The Light failed; but the Darkness that followed was more than loss 
of light. In that hour was made a Darkness that seemed not lack but a thing with 
being of its own: for it was indeed made by malice out of Light” ( Silm. 81). The 
endless expanse of emptiness surrounding them is conceived as a kind of Being 
in itself or anti-Being. The translations lack the option of capital-D Darkness. The 
Li translation does nothing about the problem but relies on the context, which 
in this case makes the meanings of the words clear enough (Li Silm.76). But Deng 
is more perceptive of the nuance. For the simple “but the Darkness”, Deng shifts 
the grammar a little: “There was at that time created a kind of darkness” (Deng 
Silm. 2002 107). For Darkness as “ a thing with being of its own,” Den g has “it 
was a kind of concrete existence ( 實體存在 shiti cunzai)” (Deng Silm. 2002 103). 
And in the later version, the Darkness “possessed its own life ( 拥有自己的生命 
yongyou ziji de shengming)” (Deng Silm. 2015 107).  
Eric Reinders 
60  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
 
EMPTINESS AND HUNDUN 
In the original, Melkor “had gone often alone into the void places 
seeking the Imperishable Flame; for desire grew hot within him to bring into 
Being things of his own, and it seemed to him that Ilúvatar took no thought for 
the Void, and he was impatient of its emptiness” ( Silm. 4). We see void, Void, 
and emptiness. Deng treats both “the void places” and “the Void” as “‘the 
domain of emptiness’ ( 空虛之境 kongxu zhi jing )” and elaborates on emptiness 
as kong with the phrase 空無一物 kong wu yi wu, “empty without a single thing” 
(Deng Silm. 2002 4–5; 2015 32–33). But Li introduces a different Void: “He often 
went alone to the empty and spacious ( 空旷 kongkuang) places, looking for the 
‘unextinguishing flame.’ In his breast there was a hot desire, he thought to make 
life (生命 shengming) himself. In his view, Ilúvatar basically had not thought of 
the hundun unmanifested world (混沌未开的世界 hundun weikai de shijie). Facing 
an expanse of emptiness (kongxu), he was very impatient” (Li Silm. 4). Here we 
get three voids: 1. “the void places” is 空旷之地 kongkuang zhidi, empty and vast 
place, big open space; 2. “the Void” is  kongxu, meaning empty, emptiness; and 
3. “its emptiness” is  混沌 hundun, which is further clarified  by the phrase 
“unmanifested world” or “the world not yet begun.”  
Hundun is a term of Daoist origin, usually glossed as a primordial 
chaotic potentiality, a seething foment which allows no divisions. It is not empty. 
Whereas in a void there is nothing, in hundun there is no (particular, 
individualizable) thing. Everything is there, but distinctions cannot be made, so 
we are unable to make selfish subject -object distinctions, let alone distinctions 
such as chair-table-room-person.  
This notion of hundun, if not the term itself, appears for example in 
chapter 69 of the Daodejing (here using Lau’s translation of the Mawangdui 
version):  
 
There is a thing confusedly formed (混成 huncheng), 
Born before heaven and earth. 
Silent and void (寥 liao, silent, deserted, open) 
It stands alone and does not change. 
Goes round and does not weary. 
It is capable of being the mother of heaven and earth. 
As yet I do not know its name.  
I style it ‘the way’ (dao 道). (Lau) 
 
In this sense there is no thing in hundun. If an image of emptiness is a 
bowl with nothing in it, the image of hundun would be a bowl with a gloppy, 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  61 
squishy soup in it—indeed, the term comes to us in its English pronunciation of 
its Cantonese pronunciation: wonton. Next time you have wonton soup, 
remember that you’re looking at a Daoist image of the original and ultimately 
true form of the universe. Ex cept that the bowl isn’t part of the metaphor, of 
course. Hundun does resemble śūnyatā, in that neither posits a simple absence 
(like an empty room), but hundun emphasizes the chaos (in which no single 
thing exists separately) where śūnyatā emphasizes abse nce (of any separate 
thing).   
Similarly, when Ilúvatar says, “And I will send forth into the Void the 
Flame Imperishable” ( Silm. 9), Li gives us hundun: “I want to send the 
unextinguishing flame into an expanse of hundun (yipian hundun zhizhong)” (Li 
Silm. 9). Consistent with other cases, Deng uses “domain of emptiness” (Deng 
Silm.2002 11; 2015 37 is almost the same). The Thai, of course, has no hundun: 
“we will send eternal fire into the soonpumi)” or empty place (Thanyaprasertkul 
Silm. 46).  
A synonym for hundun is dakuai 大塊/大快—the great clod, the big 
lump. An image of lumpy inertia. But also the imagery of eggs, the womb, and 
fetal gestation are frequently part of this concept. There is some overlap with the 
story of Pangu, first recorded in the 3 rd century CE but undoubtedly older. 
Initially there is only formless chaos, which eventually forms a cosmic egg. 
Inside the egg, yin and yang harmonize and create a humanoid figure, Pangu. 
He then creates the world in a division and separation of earth and sky (again, 
a binary polarity). Then Pangu dies and falls apart, becoming parts or aspects of 
the world such as the sun and moon, the wind, mountains and rivers, and 
animals—here death is associated with multiplicity and physical substance —
with our world.  
The Daoist philosopher Zhuangzi  莊子/庄子 (ca. 369–286 BCE) tells a 
story about the egg -like hundun: as a primordial unity it was whole and filled 
with life; the Emperors of the North and South (representing binary distinction) 
wanted to be helpful, and thought: we have seven holes in our bodies, let’s give 
hundun seven holes. They drilled a hole a day, and on the seventh day hundun 
died (Mair 71). In Daoism this story illustrates a basic distinction between 
qiantian and houtian, literally anterior heaven and p osterior heaven. We 
shouldn’t take “heaven” too literally here, but read it more as “world.” The 
world before the fall, and the world after. The world before is “ the hundun 
unmanifested world (hundun weikai de shijie),” in which all things are potential, 
whole, and integral, if as yet unrealized. We are living in the world after, in 
which we make the millions of distinctions whereby we cut the world up into 
tiny pieces, and obscure the fundamental integrity of the world. This is imagined 
as a lamentable fall from potential to actual, from infinite to finite, from 
deathless to mortal.   
Eric Reinders 
62  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
There are other examples of hundun as Void. “But when they were 
come into the Void, Ilúvatar said to them: ‘Behold your Music!’ […] and they 
saw a new World made visible before them, and it was globed amid the Void, 
and it was sustained therein, but was not of it” (Silm. 6). As George MacDonald 
said of God’s creation, “ He utters them into the visible” (4). Li’s re-telling has, 
“Coming to the place of hundun, Ilúvatar said to them: ‘Look at your music!’ […] 
Before the Ainur’s eyes appeared a new world, that was a giant globe which 
formed in the midst of hundun. It seemed to be continuously suspended there, 
constant and not decreasing” (Li Silm. 6). And Deng: “They came to ‘the domain 
of emptiness,’ Ilúvatar said to them: ‘Look! Your musical movement! (yuezhang)’ 
[…] Before their eyes appeared a new world (yuzhou, universe, space and time), 
in the emptiness ( 空無 kongwu) there was a globe ( 球體 qiuti, sphere -body) 
manifested, existing ( 存立 cunli, existing and established) and not falling in 
emptiness (kongxu), yet not belonging to ( 不屬于 bu shuyu) emptiness” (Deng, 
Silm. 2002 6; 2015 34 is similar). Whereas Li breezes past it, the more 
theologically aware translator, Deng, picks up on the notion of the world being 
“in” but not “of” the Void, very much analogous to John 17:13 –14, with its 
contrast of Christ and Christians being “in” but not “of” (shuyu) the world.  
 
VOID IN THE VALAQUENTA AND GENESIS 
Just as Genesis outlines the process of creation (Gen . 1:1–2:4) and then 
backs up and goes over part of the narrative in more detail (2:4 –2:14), when we 
move from the Ainulindalë to the Valaquenta we get another variation of the 
cosmogony. The opening lines from the Valaquenta more or less repeat the same 
initial starting point, the manifestation of the Ainur, their music, and the 
granting of vision. “Therefore Ilúvatar gave to their vision Being”( Silm. 15). The 
capital-B “Being” is a very abstract concept , even if it refers to things actually 
existing. It is paraphrased by Li as, “Ilúvatar let this view be born in the world” 
(Li Silm. 15), whereas Deng’s 2002 translation spells it out a bit more: “Soon after, 
Ilúvatar made the beautiful sight that they saw into concrete (具體 juti) material 
existence (物質存在 wuzhi cunzai)” (Deng Silm. 2002 17; 2015 43 is very similar). 
And we read, Ilúvatar “set it amid the Void” ( Silm. 15). Li: “also put it in an 
expanse of hundun (yipian hundun zhizhong)” (Li Silm. 15). Again we see the Void 
as hundun, whereas Deng has, “placed this existence in the emptiness (xukong)” 
(Deng Silm. 2002 17; 2015 43 very similar).  
Another reference to the Void suggests a rather different meaning: “But 
in after years he [Sauron] rose like a shadow of Morgoth and a ghost of his 
malice, and walked behind him on the same ruinous path down into the Void” 
(Silm. 24). Here, “into the Void” would seem to mean, into utter destruction and 
non-existence. But Li continues the usage: “Later, he simply became Morgoth’s 
shadow, became a ghost ( 幽灵 youling, dark spirit) of cruelty. Into the hundun 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  63 
world with his master he followed like a shadow, following closely” (Li Silm. 
24). Li’s text implies he became an actual ghost, rather than a continued presence 
of Morgoth’s cruelty. Similarly, the original clearly means he was like a shadow 
of Morgoth—he was a lesser form, mimicking his master, and Li loses the simile. 
Usually, I find the metaphors of the original are turned into similes in the 
Chinese; here the reverse is true. Li also reads “the Void” using the term hundun. 
Deng’s translation is particularly vivid and colorful: “he rose suddenly like the 
monstrous shadow ( 魅影 meiying, mei = demon, evil spirit + ying, shadow) of 
Morgoth, like his evil -poisonous (惡毒 e-du) ghost ( 鬼魂 guihun) continuing to 
be tangled in the world, until in the end he stepped on Morgoth’s dust (houchen, 
dust raised by someone walking ahead), fell into emptiness ( kongxu)” (Deng 
Silm. 2002 30; see also 2015 52). She makes the shadow monstrous. And walking 
behind Morgoth now has a more vivid and dismal quality.  
Given the widespread presence of Christianity in China today, the 
translations of Void may not only suggest Daoism and Buddhism. Genesis 1:1, 
from the RSV: “In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth. The 
earth was without form and void.” A modern Catholic Mandarin Chinese 
translation has: “At the start of the original beginning, when the Lord of Heaven 
made heaven and earth, the great land was one expanse of hundun, without form 
and without pattern.” I have checked several Protestant translatio ns and they 
also use hundun. Reading the Ainulindalë, a reader may just as likely hear an echo 
of the Bible as a Daoist text.  
Of course, there is another cosmogony in the Bible, one that is sound -
based: the start of John’s Gospel: “In the beginning was the Word, and the Word 
was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God; all 
things were made through him, and without him was not anything made that 
was made” (John 1:1–4). The same Chinese Catholic translation has: “At the start 
of the original beginning, there was ‘dao’, ‘dao’ and the Lord of Heaven existed 
together, ‘dao’ was the Lord of Heaven. In the beginning, ‘dao’ existed together 
with the Lord of Heaven. The myriad things ( wanwu) were made according to 
‘dao,’ without ‘dao’ there would be nothing at all.” Here we have Logos glossed 
as Dao, the key concept after which “Daoism” (or “Taoism”) is named. (This 
choice is further complicated by the use of dao as a verb, meaning “to speak,” a 
pun we find in the first line of the Daodejing.) We also have “all things” 
translated as 萬物 wanwu, myriad things, 10,000 things. This is another 
intertextual moment: In the Daodejing, chapter 42, the transition from the world-
before to the world-after is phrased as “The dao gave birth to one, one gave birth 
to two, two gave birth to three, and three gave birth to the ten thousand things 
(wanwu)” (author’s translation).  
 
 
Eric Reinders 
64  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
CONCLUSION 
The beginning of the world was an emergence from some 
undifferentiated and non -dual state into differentiated form, and this 
fragmenting process is associated with speaking or naming. This is a familiar 
pattern from Daoist philosophy, and from the Christia n Bible, and from 
Buddhist philosophy (sort -of). It also resonates with chaos theory, the 
emergence of cognition, and childbirth. Time is a descent: from good to bad, from 
spirit to form, from long life to short life.  
The Daoist, Buddhist, or Christian origins of certain terms, and the 
intertextual flow among these categories, do not of course require us to see those 
religions in every use of a word. Hundun is also used in the phrase hundun lilun, 
“chaos theory.” Dao can also simply mean a way (to get somewhere or do 
something). But even secularized terminology, when re-inserted into a scripture 
or a scripture -like fiction, is re -animated with religious meaning. An 
examination of the Buddhist or Daoist elements, whether in Chinese or Thai 
translations or in the original, is certainly not equivalent to claiming they were 
intended. Finding them in a translation assumes only that translators use what 
is available to them, and that no language is entirely free of its form of life. As 
Wittgenstein wrote, “to imagine a language means to imagine a form of life” (8). 
 
 
TRANSLATIONS OF THE SILMARILLION:  
Deng, Jiawan 邓嘉宛/鄧嘉宛, translator. Jingling baozuan 精靈寶鑽 (The Elves’ 
Jewels). By J.R.R. Tolkien, Linking, 2002.  
Deng, Jiawan 邓嘉宛, translator. Jingling baozuan 精灵宝钻 (The Elves’ Jewels). 
By J.R.R. Tolkien, Shanghai People’s Publishing House and Horizon 
Media, 2015. 
Li, Yao 李尧, translator. Mojie qiyuan: Jingling baozuan 魔戒起源：精灵宝钻 (The 
Beginning of The Magic Ring: The Elves’ Jewels). By J .R.R. Tolkien, Yilin 
Press, 2001.  
Thanyaprasertkul, Thida ธิดำ ธัญญประเสิฐกุล, translator. The Silmarillion: 
ต ำนำนแห่งซิลมำริล Tamnaan haeng Sinmarin , (Legend of the Silmarils). By 
J.R.R. Tolkien, Praeo yowachon, 2010.  
 
 
WORKS CITED 
Briggs, Kate . This Little Art. Fitzcarraldo Editions, 2017. 
Emmerich, Karen. Literary Translation and the Making of Originals. Bloomsbury, 2017.  
Ferré, Vincent, Daniel Lauzon, and David Riggs. “Traduire Tolkien en Français: On 
the Translation of J.R.R. Tolkien’s Works into French and their Reception in 
Divinity and the Void in Chinese and Thai Translations of the Ainulindalë 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  65 
France.” Tolkien in Translation , edited by Thomas Honegger, Walking Tree, 
2011, pp. 45–67.  
Fimi, Dimitra. Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits . Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2009.  
Halsall, Michael John. Creation and Beauty in Tolkien’s Catholic Vision: A Study in the 
Influence of Neoplatonism in J.R.R. Tolkien’s Philosophy of Life as ‘Being and Gift’,  
Lutterworth, 2019.  
Harrison, Perry Neil. “On Nothing: Tolkien, Ungoliant, and Anselmian Thought.” 
Mallorn, iss. 65, 2024, pp. 35–39.  
Hooker, Mark T. Tolkien Through Russian Eyes. Walking Tree, 2003.  
Lau, D.C., translator. Tao Te Ching. Everymans Library, 1994.  
MacDonald, George. A Dish of Orts, Chiefly papers on the Imagination, and on Shakespere 
[sic]. Sampson Low Marston, 1893. 
Mair, Victor H., translator. Wandering on the Way: Early Taoist Tales and Parables of 
Chuang Tzu. Bantam Books, 1994.  
Muling Shengjin 牧靈聖經 [The Bible]. International Catholic Biblical Society, 1998.  
Reinders, Eric.  Reading Tolkien in Chinese: Religion, Fantasy and Translation. 
Bloomsbury, 2014.  
Tolkien, J.R.R., The Silmarillion. Ballantine Books, 2002. 
—. Tolkien on Fairy -stories: Expanded Edition, with Commentary and Notes . Edited by 
Verlyn Flieger and Douglas A. Anderson, HarperCollins, 2008. 
Venuti, Lawrence. Contra Instrumentalism: A Translation Polemic . U of Nebraska P, 
2019. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. Philosophical Investigations, 2nd edition, translated by G.E.M. 
Anscombe, Blackwell, 1958.  
 
ERIC REINDERS is associate professor of religion at Emory University, where he 
teaches on Chinese religion, theories of religion, and religion and fantasy. His B.A. 
and M.Phil are from Hull University, UK, and his Ph.D. is from the University of 
California, Santa Barba ra. He is the author of Reading Tolkien in Chinese: Religion, 
Fantasy and Translation  (2024), The Moral Narratives of Hayao Miyazaki (2016), and 
Buddhist and Christian Responses to the Kowtow Problem in China (2015). His current 
research concerns Chinese translations of Dracula. 
 
 
  

  
 
JOIN T H E  M Y T H O P O E I C  S O C I E T Y TODAY AND ENJOY :  
 
 THOUGHT-PROVOKING AND RESPECTED PUBLICATIONS 
Our reviews quarterly Mythprint (free with membership) keeps readers up to date on 
newly published fantasy literature, films, and academic titles. Members also receive the 
Annual Report  and Member Directory . The peer -reviewed journal Mythlore features 
scholarly articles on mythopoeic literature. Our annual literary magazine, Mythic Circle, 
publishes new fiction, art, and poetry with mythopoeic themes. The Mythopoeic Press 
publishes both scholarly editions of literary works and critical essays. The Society also 
produces specialized works on Tolkien’s invented languages and other topics. Members 
receive advance notice of new publications and special discounted rates. 
 OUTSTANDING CONFERENCES 
Our annual conference (Mythcon) encourages scholars, authors, and readers to exchange 
ideas and share their insights and love of mythopoeic literature. Guests of Honor have 
included authors such as Neil Gaiman, Ursula K. Le Guin, and Tim Powers, as well as  
noted scholars such as Michael Drout, Verlyn Flieger, Douglas Anderson and Christopher 
Tolkien. As a small conference, we enjoy an intimacy with our guests that most 
conferences cannot provide. The Society has been instrumental in the development and 
encouragement of young scholars. There is a special award for best student paper at 
Mythcon, and funding to help “starving scholars” defray conference costs. Society 
members receive big discounts on registration and can share in other benefits. 
 LITERARY AND SCHOLARLY AWARDS 
Our Society’s book awards nominees are selected by our members. Society members can 
nominate books for the Mythopoeic Fantasy Awards for both adults and children or for 
the Mythopoeic Scholarship Awards in Inklings Studies and Myth and Fantasy Studies. 
Society members may also serve on the juries to review nominees and select winners. 
 COMMUNITIES OF READERS AND SCHOLARS 
 Society members share their love of and scholarly interest in fantasy literature through 
organized discussion groups in various regions across the United States. They can also 
join an email discussion group, connect through our Facebook group, follow us on Twitter, 
or use other social media options. From our “Members” page you can link to your own 
web site or blog.  
 BECOME A LIFETIME MEMBER 
In addition to the benefits of regular membership, Lifetime Members receive the electronic 
version of Mythlore for free.  
 KEEPING THE MYTHOPOEIC FLAME ALIVE 
The Mythopoeic Society (founded in 1967) is one of the oldest organizations extant for 
those interested in fantasy and its study and appreciation. Though we have made 
impressive contributions to Mythopoeic Studies, we have always been a small nonprofit, 
run totally by unpaid volunteers. Without memberships, we’ d cease to exist. We cover all the 
Inklings. We welcome scholars from a variety of disciplines, independent scholars, and 
anyone who reads and loves fantasy literature. As a member you can have influe nce on 
the direction of the Society by voting on its leadership —or become part of that 
leadership yourself. 
mythsoc.org/join.htm   
  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  67 
 
 
                  HE MIDDLE -(U N)MAN OF DESIRE :  
                          A GIRARDIAN READING OF PERELANDRA  
 
                                              CLINTON MANLEY  
 
In the birth of desire, the third person is always present.  
—René Girard1 
 
HY DO WE DESIRE WHAT WE DO ? WHY DO WE STRIVE  for a certain 
education, aim at a certain career, read certain books, pursue certain 
lovers, or attend certain conferences? In short, why do we want what we want? 
French polymath René Girard answers that we desire what we do because we 
imitate the desires of others. According to Girard, we don’t actually know what 
to want so we look at our heroes and neighbors to see what they want and follow 
suit. Girard identifies this mimetic desire as the engine that drives human culture.2 
Girard famously argues that all great works of literature “reveal the 
imitative nature of desire” ( Deceit 14).3 The greater the work, the more 
mimetically perspicacious the author. Given Girard’s theory, we would expect 
the greatest fantasy authors to erect their sub -creative world with an intimate 
awareness of mimetic desire. And when we turn to C.S. Lewis, this is just what 
we find.  
Lewis repeatedly explores imitation and rivalry with hyper -mimetic 
characters like Edmund Pevensie, Orual, and the unstable Studdocks. But 
perhaps Lewis’s most insightful exploration of this middle place of desire comes 
in the middle book of his Ransom tri logy. Perelandra presents a supposal of an 
Eden-like temptation in an unfallen world, and Lewis envisions this event as 
inexorably mimetic. In this paper, I argue that the Un -man’s temptation 
intentionally leverages the power of mimetic desire. Therefore, a Girardian 
reading of Perelandra offers fruitful insight into Lewis’s take on Satanic 
deception.  
 
1 Girard, Deceit, Desire, and the Novel: Self and Other in Literary Structure [Deceit] 21. 
2 Burgis defines mimetic desire as “[d]esire generated and formed through the imitation of 
what someone else has already desired or is perceived to desire. Mimetic desire means that 
we choose objects due to the influence of a third party, a model or mediator of desire” (223). 
3 “[T]he great writers apprehend intuitively and concretely, through the medium of their 
art, if not formally, the system in which they were first imprisoned together with their 
contemporaries” (Girard, Deceit 3).  
W 
Clinton Manley 
68  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Before exploring Perelandra directly, I will briefly summarize Girard’s 
mimetic theory and present Lewis’s exposition of that same desire in his essay 
“The Inner Ring.” 
 
LOVE BY ANOTHER’S EYES 
Love in one person is infectious in kindling it in another.  
—Augustine, Confessions IV. xiv (21) 
GIRARD’S MIMETIC THEORY 
Girard’s mimetic theory is vast and deep, but even a child can grasp 
the basic concept. If a toddler walks into a room with a hundred 
indistinguishable toy cars and another toddler is playing with one of those cars, 
which car will the new child desire? Of course, the car being played with. Why? 
Because desire is contagious . The original child 
indicates the value of the toy to the second. And 
if there are no checks in place, their shared 
desire will result in rivalry and toddler violence. 
Without outside int erference, the only way to 
avoid the conflict would be to introduce a third 
notably different toddler into the mix that the 
first two could vent their aggression on. Behold 
mimetic theory in miniature.  
All desire (apart from basic survival needs) is the result of imitating the 
desires of others. Girard explains, “We assume that desire is objective or 
subjective, but in reality, it rests on a third party who gives value to the objects” 
(Girard, I See Satan Fall Like Lightening  [Satan] 9). Our desires spring not from 
within ourselves or from the object's intrinsic value but from the presence of a 
third party —what Girard calls a mediator.4 Mediators are “go -betweens” or 
middlemen of desire, “acting as agents between the individual imitating them 
and the world” (Williams ix). For Girard, the shape of desire is triangular, 
existing in this middle place between a subject, a model, and an object. When the 
desired object can be shared, mimesis leads to friendship. Thus, Girard affirms, 
“Mimetic desire is intrinsically good” (Satan 15). However, when the object cannot 
be shared, rivalry and violence inevitably ensue. “The mimesis of desire is both the 
best of friendship and the worst of hatred” (Girard, A Theater of Envy [Envy] 10).5  
 
4 Mimetic theory does not deny objective values or the intrinsic worth of things, but how 
we come to see and desire those values relies on a mediator.  
5 “Friendship is this perpetual coincidence of two desires. But envy and jealously are 
exactly the same thing” (Envy 10). 
New 
Toddler 
First Toddler 
Toy 
Car 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  69 
Consider one more example. 
When you see a commercial for an ice -cold 
Coke, what do you immediately long for? 
Coke, of course. All advertising is 
intrinsically mimetic, indicating what you 
ought to want. But more importantly, how is 
that value indicated? Typically, an 
obviously attractive person models the 
drink. Girard exposes the tactic: “[T]he most 
skillful advertising does not try to convince that a product is superior but that it 
is desired by Others” ( Deceit 104). Objects are much like sports jerseys. They 
have little value to us in themselves, but when we don the jersey with the star’s 
name, we become like the star.  
Mimetic theory posits that all desire is ultimately metaphysical or 
ontological. We long to be the mediator. The desired object is simply a means to 
that end.6 This longing-to-be is exactly what Lewis describes in his seminal essay 
on desire.  
 
LEWIS’S INNER RING 
What has been observed of Shakespeare is undoubtedly true of Lewis, 
he “explains everything he dramatizes and dramatizes everything he explains” 
(Envy 146). The desire he dramatizes elsewhere (especially in That Hideous 
Strength), he explains in “The Inner Ring.” He states, “I believe that in all men’s 
lives […] one of the most dominant elements is the desire to be inside the local 
Ring and the terror of being left outside” (146). For Lewis, human beings have a 
ubiquitous desire to get in. The desire may be 
sparked by a shared object of interest—a hobby 
or work of art —but the real aim is the sense of 
being that is imagined to come with entry into 
the Ring. This “longing to be inside” is nothing 
other than Girard’s metaphysical desire. To be in 
is to be like. Those in the desirable circle mediate 
the desire for the status of being in the circle.  
Just like mimetic desire, Lewis sees 
the Inner Ring as inevitable —in itself neither good nor bad. “This desire is one 
of the great permanent mainsprings of human action” (151). But it is dangerous 
and easily manipulated. The lust to get in energizes competition, rivalry, and 
advertisement, often leading to moral compromises. “Of all passions the passion 
 
6 “However desirable the object may be, it pales in comparison with the model who gives 
it value” (Envy 43). 
 
Subject 
Mediator 
Object 
Outsider 
Inner Ring 
Inner 
Ring 
Clinton Manley 
70  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
for the Inner Ring is most skilful in making a man who is not yet a very bad man 
do very bad things” (154). Or we might say the passion for the Inner Ring can 
make a Lady who is not yet bad at all do very tragic things.  
Like Girard, Lewis sees this imitative desire ending in disappointment 
and eventually disaster unless recognized and renounced. “The quest of the 
Inner Ring will break your heart unless you break it” (156). In a sense, 
Perelandra’s central drama embodies this one statement.  
 
THE MIDDLE-(UN)MAN OF DESIRE 
I will excite their minds with more desire.  
—Satan, Paradise Lost (4.522–23)7 
 
The temptation scene in Perelandra is a supposal of what might have 
happened in Eden. The Un -man, a Satan figure who stood before Eve in the 
garden (Lewis, Perelandra [P] 103) and remembers the cry from the cross (130), 
tempts the Green Lady, a new Eve, to disobey Maleldil’s (God’s) single 
command not to sleep on the Fixed Lands. However, Maleldil sends the man 
Ransom to thwart the Un-man’s assault.  
Lewis presents three conversations between the Un-man and the Lady. 
After the final one, he summarizes the Un -man’s tactics, “He was making her 
mind a theater in which that phantom self should hold the stage. He had already 
written the play” ( P 118). This strategy has three mimetic tactics that roughly 
correspond to the three cycles of conversation: 1) make her mind a theater, 2) 
write the play, and 3) put self on stage. We will examine each in turn. 
 
1. MAKE HER MIND A THEATER 
If every Pandarus is a kind of playwright, all playwrights are panders in disguise. 
—René Girard8 
 
If we were to imagine an average tempter, say the demonic apprentice 
in The Screwtape Letters , attempting to cause the Lady to fall, the brunt of the 
assault would likely focus on the Fixed Lands themselves. The tempter would 
wax eloquent about the Lands’ desirability and the injustice of God to deny 
them. However, the Un-man takes a far more subtle route.  
 
7 It is beyond the scope of this essay, but the parallels between Milton’s Satan and Lewis’s 
Un-man are legion. The tactics both use to temp the Eve-character are essentially the same. 
Both leverage the power of mimetic desire through the faculty of imagination. Of course, 
we would expect these parallels since Lewis was writing A Preface to Paradise Lost around 
the same time as Perelandra. But the mimetic nature of Milton’s Satan confirms we are on 
the right track in seeing the same dynamic in Lewis.  
8 Envy 158. 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  71 
A PANDER OF DESIRE 
The Un -man acts as a pander of desire . As Girard observes of 
Shakespeare’s Pandarus, the Un -man acts as “the midwife and engineer of 
desire, its Alexander and Napoleon. […] Like 
the God of Descartes, his initial push sets 
entire worlds in motion” ( Envy 123). Or at 
least, so he hopes. He channels the zeitgeist 
of advertising and targets the Lady as his sole 
demographic. Like the advertiser, the pander 
role allows the Un-man to foster desire in the 
Lady without becoming her rival. He can 
orchestrate the f all of Perelandra from 
outside the mimetic triangle. So he acts as the 
great stage manager of desire. 
 
THEATER OF THE MIND 
From the beginning, the Un-man creates in the Lady a desire to be a certain 
kind of person. He erects a stage of metaphysical desire and lures the Lady on to 
it. The desire is to be “a full woman […] like the women of my world” ( P 90—
91). When the Lady asks what those women are like, the Un-man paints a grand 
picture: 
 
They are of a great spirit. They always reach out their hands for the new 
and unexpected good, and see that it is good long before the men 
understand it. Their minds run ahead of what Maleldil has told them. 
They do not need to wait for Him to tell them what is good, but know  it 
for themselves as He does. They are, as it were, little Maleldils . And 
because of their wisdom, their beauty is as much greater than yours as the 
sweetness of these gourds surpasses the taste of water. And because of 
their beauty the love which the men have for them is as much greater than 
the King’s love for you. (P 91, emphasis mine) 
 
Welcome to the Un-man’s theater. He fills the stage of her mind with what I will 
call the eminently desirable Women of Earth (WoE). These WoE have four 
noteworthy traits to spark the Lady’s mimetic envy.  
First, the WoE are great  and great because they are progressive. They 
always reach out for the new good. Later, in a classic case of propaganda, the Un-
man redefines the word Death to capture this progressiveness. Only through 
“Death in abundance” (i.e., constant progress) can “the real oldness and the 
 
The  
Lady 
Women 
of Earth 
A Full  
Woman 
Unman 
Clinton Manley 
72  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
strong beauty and the uttermost branching out” come ( P 98).9 These traits 
characterize the WoE, and the Un-man makes Death-as-progress the pathway to 
become them.  
Second, the WoE are beautiful. However, for the Un-man, beauty is but a 
tool of envy. It only serves as an aphrodisiac of sorts. 10 Beauty is desirable 
because it inflames desire. The Un-man returns 
to this at the end of this first temptation. As he 
expands his portrait of the tragic heroine, he 
explains that by attaining rivalrous knowledge, 
a few women became “more beautiful and 
excelled their fellows a s you excel the beasts; 
and thousands were striving for their love” ( P 
103). Here the WoE are the victorious rivals of 
all lesser women and, thus, the objects of desire for all men. Beauty can make 
the Lady a new Helen, “the woman with the thousands of lovers” (P 103).  
Third, WoE are “old.”  Lewis weaves the idea of “becoming older” 
throughout this section, making it roughly synonymous with gaining wisdom 
or maturity. However, the Un -man equivocates with the term, flitting between 
wisdom, age, and loss of childlike innocence. 11 Girard captures the Un -man’s 
ambiguity well, “Hell begins when the heaven of childhood gives way to 
mimetic rivalry” ( Envy 77). The Un -man meditates a way of getting old that 
smells like sulfur. However, he makes this ill -gotten wisdom the source of the 
beauty and greatness of the WoE (P 97). He tells the Lady, “When you are fully 
grown you will be even wiser and more beautiful than the women of my own 
world” ( P 99). The Un -man makes growing old the ticket to becoming a 
victorious rival over the WoE.  
Finally, WoE are “little Maleldils.”  The Un -man presents them as 
goddesses and defines divinity as independence. They are goddesses because 
they need no mediator to show them what is good. Neither men nor Maleldil 
model desire for them. Girard calls this the Romantic self that denies the imitative 
nature of desire and instead embraces the “lie of spontaneous desire” (Deceit 16). 
The Un-man reinforces this independence later by asserting “your own reason” 
acts as the final arbiter of what is good ( P 100). Re ason stands above the 
commands of Maleldil, allowing the Lady to be “really separate from Him” ( P 
 
9 He also condemns Ransom's love of the past : “He wanted you to remain young, not to 
learn Death” (P 98). 
10 “Envy is the aphrodisiac par excellence” (Envy 23) 
11 Ransom refutes the Un-man’s advances, stating, “In our world to be older is not always 
to be wiser” (P 102). 
The Lady 
“thousands” 
WoE 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  73 
101). Again, this is just the Romantic lie12 in new clothes, but behind the king of 
all temptations stands the ancient, naked claim, “You shall be like gods” (Gen. 3:4).  
With his deft stage management, the Un-man parades the WoE as an Inner 
Ring the Lady must get into. He creates in her a desire to be “a full woman” like 
them—great, wise, beautiful, and 
divine. He fathers envy.13  
Mimetic desire to be like the 
WoE forms the cornerstone of the Un-
man’s strategy and illuminates the 
strange absence of the Fixed Lands in 
the Un-man’s initial assault. The Lady 
hints that he has spoken of the Fixed 
Lands often (P 89), but Lewis presents 
none of it. The Un -man hardly 
mentions the “object” he is trying to 
sell. Why? Because he knows if he can make the Lady desire the WoE, living on 
the Fixed Lands will serve as a means to that end. Again, Girard exposes the 
illusion of the desired object, “The object is only a means of reaching the 
mediator. The desire is a imed at the mediator’s being” (Deceit 53). The Un-man 
must make her mind a theater of desire before he incites her to action. 
 
2. WRITE THE PLAY 
Assaying, by his devilish art, to reach the organs of her fancy, and with them forge 
illusions, discontented thoughts, vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires.  
— Paradise Lost (4.800–09) 
  
In the second stage of the Un-man’s temptation, he writes the play the 
Lady must perform to become one of the WoE. To that end, the Un-man wields 
perhaps the most powerful means of awakening desire —storytelling. Stories 
appeal primarily to the imagination, not reason, and grant access to new worlds 
with new models. But the imaginary nature of literary models does not limit 
their influence over us. The mediator may be imaginary, but the mediation is 
not (Girard, Deceit 4, 23). 
The Un-man himself recognizes this power of story. When the Lady 
asks what purpose his flights of fancy serve, he responds, “The world is made 
up not only of what is but of what might be” (P 89). The Un-man knows denizens 
 
12 Burgis defines the Romanic lie as “the idea that our choices are completely autonomous, 
independent, and self -directed. Someone under the power of the Romantic Lie never 
thinks of their behavior as mimetic” (Burgis 224). 
13 “Envy subordinates a desired something to the someone who enjoys a privileged 
relationship with it,” says Girard. “Envy involuntarily testifies to a lack of being” (Envy 4). 
The  
Lady 
WoE 
A Full Woman 
(Great, Wise, 
Beautiful, Divine) 
Clinton Manley 
74  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
of imagination shape the real world, especially by influencing what we want. In 
true mythopoeic fashion, the Un-man weaves new worlds to capture the Lady’s 
fancy.14 
THE MIMETICS OF MYTHOPOEIA 
Lewis leaves us in no doubt as to what 
world the Un-man constructs. He tells the 
Lady “with extreme beauty and pathos, a 
number of stories” ( P 107). The theme 
running through these stories is the tragic 
heroine: “Each one of these women had 
stood forth alone and braved a terrible risk 
for her child, her lover, or her people. Each 
had been misunderstood, reviled and 
persecuted: but each also magnificently 
vindicated by the event” ( P 108). The Un-
man cares not if the Lady understands all 
of these tales. He aims to shape her 
imagination, not enlighten reason: 
 
What emerged from the stories was rather an image than an idea—the picture 
of the tall, slender form, unbowed though the world’s weight rested upon its 
shoulders, stepping forth fearless and friendless into the dark to do for others 
what those others forbade it to do yet needed to have done. (P 108) 
 
Jadis the White Witch, Lady Macbeth, Clytemnestra, Anna Karenina —the Un-
man conquers the Platonic form of the tragic heroine, and it is a potent 
enchantment. Even Ransom admits the spell “was very well done” ( P 108). By 
imitating these “goddess shapes,” the Lady herself can become a goddess. With 
their storyline, the Un-man sets the Lady up to be a tragic Don Quixote.15  
 
14 Girard argues extensively that myths often conceal the source of our desires, the 
inevitable violence that emerges from those rivalries, and the innocence of the scapegoat. 
Curtis Gruenler has shown that Lewis recognized this same function of myth in Till We 
Have Faces (“C.S. Lewis and René Girard on Desire, Conversion, and Myth: The Case of 
Till We Have Faces”). However, Lewis also had a high view of myth and myth -making as 
a pathway to find truth and know God. There is work to be done here reconciling these 
three so I plan to make this interaction between the Un-man’s storytelling, Girardian myth, 
and Lewisian mythopoeia the topic of a future paper.  
15 Girard reads Don Quixote as a paradigmatic example of mimetic desire meditated 
through story ( Deceit 1–4). The chivalric tales, especially about Amadís, awakened 
Quixote's desire for the being of a chivalric knight. “Amadís was the polestar, the morning 
star, the sun to valiant, enamored knights, the one who should be imitated by all of us who 
serve under the banner of love and chivalry” ( Cervantes 229). That desire—the apple of 
 
The 
Lady 
WoE in 
Stories 
Tragic 
Heroine 
The Un-man’s 
Storytelling 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  75 
MIMETIC DOUBLES 
The Un-man’s success follows quick on the heels of his storytelling. In 
Girard’s system, as mimetic rivalry increases, the subject and the mediator 
become more and more alike. He calls this mimetic doubling.16 As the subject's 
desire for the mediator increases, she will increasingly imitate them and 
differences will disappear. Lewis shows us this exact phenomenon.  
Immediately after the Un-man pens his play in the Lady’s imagination, 
she begins to look like “a tragedy queen” ( P 108). The transformation appalls 
Ransom. Until now, the Lady has been heavenly, but now she looks “so like a 
woman of our own race.” She has begun to take on the “rôle” of the WoE, 
wearing the borrowed robes of “invited grandeur” and “enjoyed pathos” ( P 
109). Through the power of suggested desire, the Un -man writes the script of 
the Lady’s fall, and she starts practicing the part.  
 
DESIRE FUELED BY DENIAL 
However, in the second phase of the temptation, the Un-man does not 
limit his tactics to the imagination. He repeatedly returns to the command —
Maleldil’s prohibition against living on the Fixed Lands. At one level, an 
explanation of this fixation springs r eady to hand. The Un -man aims at 
disobedience; therefore, he must undermine the legitimacy of the call to obey. 
This tactic is as old as Eden. But mimetically, the Un -man does something far 
more powerful. He knows the desirability of a good withheld. As any parent can tell 
you, “Don’t do that!” makes “that” all the more attractive.  
Girard explains, “The disadvantage of the prohibitions […] is that they 
don’t finally play their role in a satisfying manner. Their primarily negative 
character […] inevitably provokes in us the mimetic urge to transgress them” 
(Satan 14). A lawgiver sets himself up as an obstacle to the prohibited good—in 
Girardian terms, a rival —and “[o]pposition exasperates desire” (10). The 
Apostle Paul makes the same observation: “Sin […] through the commandment, 
produced in me all kinds of desire” (Rom. 7:8).17  
 
his eye—grew rotten and spoiled his imagination. He ended up tilting with windmills. 
The Un-man aims to make the Lady equally quixotic as she imitates the tragic trajectory 
of the heroines he portrays.  
16 “‘Mimetic doubles’ refers to the situation in which rivals become so obsessed with each 
other that they mirror each other's emotions and actions. The doubles act alike but they 
mistakenly see a great difference between them. Mimetic doubles can be quite dangerous 
to one another and to others and quite self-destructive” (Satan 22n2). 
17 Paul goes on to point out that the commandment itself is not at fault. “The law is holy, 
and the commandment is holy righteous and good” (Rom. 7:12). Lewis seems to maintain 
this same view of Maleldil’s prohibition. The prohibition in Eden against the tree of the 
knowledge of good and evil and that against sleeping on the Fixed lands, both were indeed 
prohibitions against goods, desirable in their time and place. And so, it seems like the 
Clinton Manley 
76  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
The Un-man has already stoked desire in the Lady to become like the 
WoE, that is, “little Maleldils” (P 91). Now he can return to the object as a means 
to that end.  
 
THE FINAL TOUCH 
At the end of this cultivation of the imagination, the 
Lady is almost ready for her debut. However, the 
Lady’s reaction to the Un -man’s suggested desire is 
still motivated by love for others—“love for the King 
and for her unborn children, and even, in a sense, of 
Maleldil Himself” (P 113). But the seed of selfishness 
is there, ready to produce toxic fruit: 
 
[F]rom the moment when the Un -man began its tragic stories, there was the 
faintest touch of theatricality, the first hint of a self-admiring inclination to seize 
a grand rôle in the drama of her world. It was clear that the Un -man’s whole 
effort was to increase this element. (P 113) 
 
The final step remaining for the Un-man is introducing the “unselfconscious” Lady 
to herself (P 109). The stage is set; the play is written. Now for the star of the show.  
 
3. PUT SELF ON STAGE 
Art thou afeard to be the same in thine own act and valour  
as thou art in desire […] letting ‘I dare not’ wait upon ‘I would’?  
—Lady Macbeth, Macbeth 1.7.39–44 
  
When Augustine pondered man’s original fall, he coined the term 
incurvatus in se  to capture the picture of man turned in on himself. Instead of 
being rightly ordered toward God and creatures, fallen man looks only to self. 
The Un-man tries to produce that scoliosis of the soul in the Lady in this final 
section of the temptation. As of  yet, she remains innocent. But though she had 
not fallen, “half her imagination was already filled with bright, poisonous 
shapes” (P 114). If the Un -man can inflate her self -esteem, her dreaming will 
become doing.  
 
 
 
 
“disadvantage” Girard identifies may not be the whole story. The increased desire brings 
the test to a point. Will one trust God to give the desirable good in his time and his way 
and, thus, be friends with God? Or allow the prohibition to create rivalry, as God is seen 
withholding the good (as the Un-man and the Serpent try to frame the matter)? 
The  
Lady 
Maleldil’s 
Command 
Fixed 
Land 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  77 
PLAYING DRESS-UP 
To produce that effect, the Un-man introduces the Lady to clothing. In 
a twisted parody of God clothing our first parents, the Un -man kills birds and 
weaves their feathers into a dazzling robe. The Lady wears the cloak “to be 
beautiful,” harkening back to the original rivalrous desire the Un-man fostered 
in her (P 115). At first, Ransom thinks the Un-man’s only aim is to create vanity, 
but he soon realizes the more insidious target.  
The robe is part of the Lady’s assumption of the role of tragic heroine 
mediated by the WoE. Again, Ransom observes the doubling effect: “She 
appeared to him at that moment as a woman whom an earth -born man might 
conceivably love” (P 116). By dressing her up, the Un-man instigates a full-dress 
rehearsal. The Lady becomes an actor in costume. Aristotle observed that we 
love the theater because we love imitation —mimesis. He doesn’t explain why, 
but mimetic theory does. Theater allows one to try on the being o f the other 
(Envy 59). I can put on Hamlet like a coat. I can wear Macbeth and don Brutus.  
Thus, Ransom laments the Lady’s transformation into an actor because 
it constitutes one more step down the mimetic path. When the Lady takes on the 
appearance of others, she participates in the opposite of what Lewis calls good 
pretending. For Lewis, pretending is a way of becoming. Who we pretend to be 
today determines who we become tomorrow. Desires today reveal being 
tomorrow. Thus, in assuming a role, the Lady is becoming her model. 
 
SELF, MEET SELF 
However, the Un-man uses the clothing for an even greater effect. The 
clothing provides an excuse to give the Lady a mirror and introduce her to 
herself. After the Lady laments, “We cannot see ourselves” (P 116), the Un-man 
produces a mirror from his pack and hands it to her. The effect is electric. 
“‘That thing’ (she pointed at the mirror) ‘is me and not me’” (P 117). Of 
course, that is the point. She speaks better than she knows. On one level, she sees 
herself dressed up like the WoE. The process of mimetic doubling is making her 
not-her. But at a deeper level, the physical reflection in the mirror is her but not 
all of her. “The image of her beautiful body had been offered to her only as a 
means to awaken the far more perilous image of her great soul” ( P 118). The 
physical reflection merely begins t o coil her inward, but the curve ends with 
“the dramatic conception of the self” ( P 118)—beautiful, independent, tragic, 
imperious, and desirable.  
Clinton Manley 
78  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
This romantic view of the self is critical to the Un-man’s plan. Mimetic 
desire most affects us when we least suspect it, and we least suspect it when we 
imagine ourselves most independent. The more romantic, the more mimetic. If 
I think my desires originate in me (subjective) or the object (objective), I will not 
suspect a mediator dictating them. Thus, one philosopher warns, “There are 
always models of desire. If you don’t know yours, they are probably wreaking 
havoc in your life” because “models are most  
powerful when they are hidden” (Burgis 21). By 
turning her in on herself, the Un -man blinds the 
Lady to the mimetic engine that drives the 
temptation.  
However, although the mirror elevates 
the Lady’s self -esteem and self -consciousness, it 
could not succeed without the Un -man’s praise. In 
this section, he calls her beautiful three times, a 
tactic he doesn’t use in the first two stages. Why? The flattery —the expressed 
desire couched as praise—indicates her worth and makes the mirror effective.18 
The Lady absorbs the repetitive praise of the Un -man and, as a result, loves 
herself all the more.  
 
PRIDE BOUND TO ANOTHER 
Ironically, her self -love is wholly dependent on another. As Girard 
repeatedly asserts, pride depends on the other to uphold it. “The more ‘proud’ 
and ‘egotistic’ we are, the more enslaved we become to our mimetic models” 
(Satan 15). 
Here we see how utterly self -defeating the Un -man’s tale of 
independence proves to be. In trying to create separation from Maleldil, the 
Lady must resort to other mediators. The choice is not independence or not; the 
choice is who to be dependent on. “Metaphysical autonomy” is a myth the Un-
man weaves (Girard, Deceit 56). “[Self] renounces the divine mediator only to 
fall back on the human mediator,” explains Girard. “True freedom lies in the 
basic choice between a human or divine model” (58).19 
 
18 Shakespeare captures the effect in As You Like It. Rosalind explains how Silvius’s praise 
of Phebe enflames her value of herself: “‘Tis not her glass [mirror], but you that flatter her, 
/ And out of your eyes, she sees herself more proper / Than any of her lineaments can 
show her” (3.5.54–56). 
19 The full quote is worth noting: “[Self] renounces the divine mediator only to fall back on 
the human mediator. […] Christianity directs existence toward a vanishing point, either 
toward God or toward the Other. Choice always involves choosing a model, and  true 
freedom lies in the basic choice between a human or divine model. The impulse of the soul 
toward God is inseparable from a retreat into the Self. Inversely the turning in on itself of 
The 
Lady 
Un-man’s  
Praise 
The 
Lady 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  79 
If the Lady remained rightly oriented to Maleldil and his desire 
expressed in command, she would become more and more herself. But as the 
Un-man twists her toward self, she becomes more like others —namely, the 
WoE.20 Lewis highlights this same reality repeatedly throughout his corpus. 
Through obedience, we become more fully the individual God intended us to 
be. For both Girard and Lewis, the attempt to dethrone God can only succeed in 
erecting men as gods.21  
So the Un-man crafts the theater of desire, writes the drama of the WoE, 
and casts the Lady in her role. Nothing now remains but to watch the Lady’s 
tragic fall—nothing, that is, except the eucatastrophic triumph of Ransom.  
 
THE TRIUMPH OF RANSOM 
God in his wisdom had foreseen since the beginning that the  
victim mechanism would be reversed like a glove, exposed,  
placed in the open, stripped naked, and dismantled in the Gospel.  
—René Girard22 
 
For Girard, rivalrous desire always ends in one of two ways. Either the 
subject totally renounces the desire by finding a new model (i.e., the toddler 
leaves the room) or mimetic conflict escalates, eventually resulting in violence 
(i.e., a toddler war of all -against-all). That violence is often targeted at a 
scapegoat (i.e., the different third toddler), 23 who is arbitrarily assigned blame 
for the conflict and abused, exiled, or even murdered. 24 Violence against the 
 
pride is inseparable form a movement of panic toward the Other. […] The imitation of 
Christ becomes the imitation of one’s neighbor” (Deceit 58–9). Elsewhere Girard expands 
the point: “What Jesus invites us to imitate is his own desire, the spirit that directs him 
toward the goal on which his intention is fixed: to resemble God the Father as much as 
possible. […] In inviting us to imitate him, he invites us to imitate his imitation. […] [O]nce 
we imitate Jesus, we discover that our aspi ration to autonomy has always made us bow 
down before individuals” (Satan 13–14). 
20 “[The] atomization of the personality is the final stage of internal mediation” (Deceit 92). 
21 “The romantic is always falling on his knees before the wrong altar; he thinks he is 
sacrificing the world on the altar of his Self whereas the real object of his worship is the 
Other” (Deceit 87).  
22 Satan 151. 
23 In mimetic theory, a scapegoat is “[a] person, group, or thing that a community chooses 
to expel or eliminate in the midst of a mimetic crisis in order to bring about a resolution. 
The scapegoat absorbs all of the mimetic tension and violence, which had previously been 
undirected and chaotic, onto itself. The scapegoat is often chosen randomly, through a 
mimetically driven process of judgment” (Burgis 224). 
24 Girard points to Joseph as a prime example of this mimetic cycle, but instead of 
concealing the innocence of the scapegoat as myths do, the Bible exposes the collective 
violence of Joseph’s brothers against an innocent victim (Oedipus Unbound 105–13). 
Clinton Manley 
80  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
scapegoat is cathartic but does nothing to remove the root of rivalry. For Girard, 
all human culture grows from this scapegoat mechanism  and “the founding 
murder.”25 
However, Girard argues that Christ, as the innocent and voluntary 
scapegoat, exposes the mechanism. Christ really does bear the sins of the world 
and so secures real peace. He is the divine model of rightly ordered desires. 
Therefore, for both Girard and L ewis, the cross is the corner of cosmic history, 
the turning point after which there is no return ( P 54). The triumph of the cross 
unveils the deceptive catharsis of the scapegoat. We can no longer take refuge 
in the faux happy ending it offers.26 
Therefore, it is fitting —and utterly Girardian —that the mimetic 
escalation in Perelandra ends in violence that imitates the cross—imitates but does 
not duplicate. Ransom realizes the Un-man’s mimetic tactics are bound to succeed 
eventually. At the end of each temptation cycle, he laments, “This can’t go on” (P 
109, 114, 119). Finally, he concludes he must sacrifice himself to destroy the Un-
man’s power over the Lady. Maleldil confirms Ransom’s fears, “It is not for 
nothing that you are named Ransom. […] My name also is Ransom” (P 125–26). 
To use Girard’s categories, Ransom looks to Christ as a non-rivalrous model.  
But Ransom would not endure a second cross for “Maleldil never 
repeated Himself” ( P 123). Instead, Ransom gives himself to be a preemptive 
scapegoat of mimetic violence. No sin needs redemption on Perelandra, but there 
is mimetic tension to deescalate. Both symbolically and physically, Ransom 
bears the teeth and claws of mimetic violence unleashed by the Un -man. He, in 
a sense, preemptively rescues an unfallen world with a new kind of redemption. 
Ransom is a scapegoat that prevents sin instead of atoning for sin.  
It is hard to imagine anything more Girardian or Lewisian or Christian 
than this ending. Ransom averts the mimetic crisis instigated by the Satanic Un-
man by imitating the sacrifice of Christ. The mimetic reading of Perelandra 
 
25 “Sacrifice lies behind everything distinguishing humans from animals, behind  
everything enabling us to substitute properly human desire for animal instinct, namely, 
mimetic desire. If becoming human involves, among other things, acquiring mimetic 
desire, it is obvious that humans could not exist in the beginning without sacrificia l 
institutions that repress and moderate the kind of conflict that is inevitable with the 
working of mimetic desire” (Satan 90). 
26 Many of Shakespeare’s plays employ the scapegoat mechanism to offer the semblance 
of a happy ending to unperceptive readers. Uncovering Shakespeare’s brilliant use of the 
scapegoat is one of Girard’s major themes in A Theater of Envy. Elsewhere, he explains how 
the Gospels exposed the scapegoat mechanism: “The Passion accounts reveal a 
phenomenon that unbeknownst to us generates all human cultures and still warps our 
human vision in favor of all sorts of exclusions and scapegoating. I f this analysis is true, 
the explanatory power of Jesus’ death is much greater than we realize, and Paul's exalted 
idea of the Cross as the source of all knowledge is anthropologically sound” (Satan 3). 
The Middle-(Un)man of Desire: A Girardian Reading of Perelandra 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  81 
indeed opens up “a new dimension of glory” (P 184) and new insights into both 
the power and impotence of Satan's deception. To quote Tor of Perelandra, “We 
have learned of evil, though not as the Evil One wished us to learn. We have 
learned better than that” (P 179). 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Burgis, Luke. Wanting: The Power of Mimetic Desire in Everyday Life. St. Martin’s Press, 
2021.  
Cervantes. Don Quixote. Translated by Edith Grossman, HarperCollins, 2012. 
Girard, René. A Theater Of Envy: William Shakespeare. St. Augustine’s Press, 2004.  
—. Deceit, Desire, and the Novel: Self and Other in Literary Structure. Johns Hopkins UP, 
1976.  
—. I See Satan Fall Like Lightning. Translated by James G. Williams, Orbis, 2001.  
—. Oedipus Unbound. Edited by Mark R. Anspach, Stanford UP, 2004.  
Gruenler, Curtis. “C.S. Lewis and Rene Girard on Desire, Conversation, and Myth: 
The Case of Till We Have Faces .” Christianity and Literature, vol. 60.2, 2011, pp. 
247–65. 
Lewis, C.S. Perelandra. Scribner, 1996.  
—. “The Inner Ring.” The Weight of Glory, HarperOne, 2001, pp. 141–57.  
Shakespeare, William. As You Like It. Norton Shakespeare, W.W. Norton, 2016. 
Williams, James G. Foreword. I See Satan Fall Like Lightning  by René Girard, 
translated by James G. Williams, Orbis, 2001, pp. ix–xxiii. 
 
CLINTON MANLEY is a recent graduate of Bethlehem Seminary. He currently serves 
as an instructor of literature at Bethlehem College and editor for Desiring God 
Ministries. He lives in Minneapolis with his lovely bride, Mackenzie, and their three 
children.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
https://openclipart.org/detail/325506/topless-lady-frame, by j4p4n

  
 
MYTHOPOEIC SOCIETY MEMBERSHIPS  
 
Regular annual membership is available with print or electronic Mythprint. 
One year with electronic Mythprint in PDF format:   $12.00 
One year with Mythprint mailed (USA):                       $25.00 
One year with Mythprint mailed (Canada/Mexico):   $32.00 
One year with Mythprint mailed (Rest of world):       $41.00 
Additional members at same address:                          $5.00  
 
Life membership in the Society is non -transferrable and includes the Society’s quarterly 
review magazine, Mythprint, in whatever format it is published, or in the member’s choice 
of format if multiple formats are available. Electronic Mythlore is also included free with 
the lifetime membership. 
Shipping location/Age: Under       50    50–59     60+ 
USA                                                 $400    $300   $200  
Canada/Mexico                              $540   $405    $270  
Rest of World                                 $720   $540    $360  
 
Lifetime memberships can be purchased for additional people in the same household. The 
price for the primary membership for the household is based on the age of the youngest 
member: 
Age of additional member        Under 50   50 –59   60+ 
Additional membership:                    $100   $75      $50  
 
www.mythsoc.org/join/ 
 
 
MYTHIC CIRCLE 
 
The Mythic Circle  is a small literary annual published by the Mythopoeic Society, an organization 
dedicated to J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and Charles Williams. The Mythic Circle seeks contributions of 
fantasy- or mythic -inspired original stories, poems, and works of visual art. See our contributor 
guidelines at www.mythsoc.org/mythic-circle/mythic-circle-submissions.htm. 
 
To submit work to The Mythic Circle, follow one of these options:  
 
Paper contributions/letters of comment— OR Email attachments of PDF files— 
Victoria Gaydosik, Editor of Mythic Circle  mythiccircle@mythsoc.org         
PO Box 25     
Weatherford OK 73096 
OR 
Upload through the Digital Commons—dc.swosu.edu/cgi/submit.cgi?context=mcircle# 
 
Editors: 
                   Victoria Gaydosik, fiction and visual art          Nolan Meditz, poetry and visual art 
Gwenyth Hood, editor emerita 
 

  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  83 
 
                            HE LIBERTY TO BIND ONESELF :  
                                 CHESTERTON AND THE OATH  
                                               OF FËANOR  
 
                                           MATTHEW MCKENNA  
 
INTRODUCTION 
T IS WELL -KNOWN THAT G.K. CHESTERTON WAS INFLUENTIAL ON TOLKIEN.1 This 
paper will read the oath of Fëanor in The Silmarillion  through the lens of 
Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths, and it will suggest that Tolkien was 
speculatively influenced by Chesterton on this topic. It will do this by an 
exposition of Chesterton’s philosophy of vows followed by an in -depth 
exposition of the oath of Fëanor throug hout The Silmarillion. The thesis is that 
the oath of Fëanor works according to the mode of Chesterton’s philosophy of 
oaths, that is, the oath compels the oath-taker to act. Viewing the oath of Fëanor 
through the framework of Chestert on’s philosophy of oath s helps make it 
explicit to the reader how the oath drives the sons of Fëanor to commit many 
evil acts.  
Additionally, this paper will respond to a claim regarding the oath of 
Fëanor made by Alexander Bruce. This will show a practical benefit of reading 
the oath of Fëanor through the lens of Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths by 
highlighting the diminished freedom of the sons of Fëanor.  
 
CHESTERTON ON THE VOW 
 Chesterton admires vows and sees them as eminently good things.2 He 
values the capacity to make a vow and considers it the very height of freedom. 
 
1 Milbank’s thesis is that “the essayist, poet, Christian apologist and writer of fantastic tales 
G.K. Chesterton was an important influence both on Tolkien’s fiction and his literary 
criticism of the fairy tale” (Milbank viii). See also Pearce 161 –81; Pear ce argues that 
Chesterton was an indirect influence on Tolkien (164).  
2 Some people think that Catholicism (the religion of both Chesterton and Tolkien) should 
forbid oaths (Meier 53). Their argument is simple, during the Sermon on the Mount Jesus 
teaches: “Again you have heard that it was said to the men of old, ‘You shall n ot swear 
falsely, but shall perform to the Lord what you have sworn.’ But I say to you, do not swear 
at all, either by heaven, for it is the throne of God, or by the earth, for it is his footstool, or 
by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King. And do not swear by your head, for you 
cannot make one hair white or black.  Let what you say be simply ‘Yes’ or ‘No;’ anything 
more than this comes from evil” (Matt. 5:33 –37, RSVCE). A simple reading of the text 
implies that taking oaths at all is wrong. Yet, Augustine and Aquinas hold that this cannot 
be taken literally since Paul takes oaths within his epistles several times ( Augustine 
I 
Matthew McKenna 
84  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
He writes, “I could never conceive or tolerate any Utopia which did not leave to 
me the liberty for which I chiefly care, the liberty to bind myself. […] If I vow to 
be faithful I must be cursed when I am unfaithful […]. I should ask to be kept to 
my bargain, to have my oaths and engagements taken seriously; I should ask 
Utopia to avenge my honour on myself” ( Orthodoxy 130). He immediately 
applies this idea to marriage as an example of such a vow, wherein people freely 
choose to bind themselves together for the rest of their lives.  
 The gravity of vows, even rash vows, appears in Chesterton’s novel The 
Man Who Was Thursday. In it, the main character Syme makes a vow to Gregory 
(a street-preacher of anarchy whom Syme does not believe is a real anarchist) 
not to reveal what Gregory will tell him (18 –19). Gregory then reveals and 
proves that he is a real anarchist with deadly plans. Syme, in turn, makes 
Gregory swear that he will not reveal to anyone what he is about to tell him (28). 
Syme then reveals to the anarchist Gregory that he is  a police detective. Both 
characters feel bound by their oath and keep their oaths throughout the story—
Syme even lies to prevent breaking his vow (81 –82).3 At one point when Syme 
is strongly tempted to break his vow he says, “Theoretically I ought to drown 
myself first. I promised a poor fellow, who was a real modern pessimist [i.e., 
Gregory], on my word of honour not to tell the police. I’m no hand at casuistry, 
but I can’t break my word to a modern pessimist. It’s like breaking one’s word 
to a child” (105). One of Syme’s companions who is in the same situation 
comments that, “I tried to tell the police and I couldn’t, because of some silly 
oath I took” (105). Even to save lives from the anarchists and their deadly plans, 
Chesterton indicates that it would be wrong to break one’s vow, even an 
admittedly rash now.  
 So, a vow or oath for Chesterton combines “the fixity that goes with 
finality with the self -respect that only goes with freedom” ( The Superstition of 
Divorce 267). It is the use of one’s greatest freedom of the will to remove one’s 
freedom in the future. Elsewhere he writes, “The man who makes a vow makes 
an appointment with himself at some distant time or place. The danger of it is 
that [he] himself should not  keep the appointment” (“A Defense of Rash 
Vows”).  
 
 
Chapter 17, #51; Aquinas II–II, q. 89, a. 2, ad 1; for examples of Paul’s oaths see Phil. 1:8, 1 
Cor. 1:9, 2 Cor. 1:23, Rom. 1:9) . Thus, due to the principle of the unity and content of 
scripture from Dei Verbum (the interpretation of any passage must take into account and 
be compatible with the rest of scripture —scripture passages enlighten each other), 
Catholics can take oaths (Dei Verbum, #12).  
3 Syme lies to Wilks (professor de Worms or Friday) about being a detective prior to 
Wilks’s revelation that he is also a detective. In a way, Syme makes an oath that he is not 
a policeman; he makes a false oath to avoid breaking his first one to Gregory.  
The Liberty to Bind Oneself: Chesterton and the Oath of Fëanor 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  85 
THE OATH OF FËANOR 
 I propose that in the oath of Fëanor we can see Chesterton’s influence 
on Tolkien. Chesterton valued freedom and the capacity to take oaths which 
bind us and limit our actions in the future. This appeared in Orthodoxy and The 
Man Who Was Thursday (key and well-known Chestertonian texts), which were 
written around the same time. The same idea will be shown to be at work in the 
oath of Fëanor for the oath-takers are bound by their oath and forced to act upon 
it. They are even moved to act against the ir consciences—the oath truly binds 
them. At the very least we see the same idea in both their thought, a convergence 
in thought. Thus, Tolkien and Chesterton agree on the binding power of oaths 
or vows. If one does not want to say that Tolkien was influenced by Chesterton 
on this point, then one can approach this idea as simply taking Chesterton’s 
philosophy of oaths as a framework for reading the oath of Fëanor.4 Taken thus, 
using Chesterton’s view on oaths helps us to see how intensely and totally the 
oath of Fëanor compels the sons and forces them to take action, even when they 
would prefer not to act.  
 The oath of Fëanor and his sons plays a key role throughout The 
Silmarillion.5 After Morgoth steals the Silmarils  and flees, Fëanor leads the 
Noldor to recover them. As they depart Valinor they take the following oath:  
 
   Then Fëanor swore a terrible oath. His seven sons leapt straightway to 
his side and took the selfsame vow together, and red as blood shone their 
drawn swords in the glare of the torches. They swore an oath which none 
shall break, and none should take, b y the name even of Ilúvatar, calling 
the Everlasting Dark upon them if they kept it not; and Manwë they 
named in witness, and Varda, and the hallowed mountain of Taniquetil, 
vowing to pursue with vengeance and hatred to the ends of the World 
Vala, Demon, Elf or Man as yet unborn, or any creature, great or small, 
good or evil, that time should bring forth unto the end of days, whoso 
should hold or take or keep a Silmaril from their possession.  
 
4 There are two chief reasons one might not want to admit an explicit influence of 
Chesterton on Tolkien regarding oaths. First, Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths is small 
and appears infrequently in his writings—it is not something for which he is known nor  
is it well drawn out by him. Second, there is no biographical evidence that Tolkien is 
drawing from Chesterton about oaths —he never mentions Chesterton’s philosophy of 
oaths or any source for the oath of Fëanor. 
5 “Fëanor inspires his sons with his terrible oath, a prime mover in the story of the 
Silmarils. The efforts of the seven sons to keep that oath lie behind the machinations of 
much of the latter part of Quenta Silmarillion, while the flight of the Noldor, inspired by 
Fëanor’s lust for vengeance against the killer of his father and the thief of the Silmarils, 
will result in the events of the middle parts of the work, the establishment and history of 
the kingdoms of the elves” (Helms 54).  
Matthew McKenna 
86  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
   Thus spoke Maedhros and Maglor and Celegorm, Curufin and 
Caranthir, Amrod and Amras, princes of the Noldor; and many quailed 
to hear the dread words. For so sworn, good or evil, an oath may not be 
broken, and it shall pursue oathkeeper and oathbreaker t o the world’s 
end. (Silmarillion [Silm] 9.73–74)6  
 
Immediately, the narrator points to the binding nature of the oath—it cannot be 
broken. There is some vagueness in precisely what this means because the 
narrator says the oath would pursue an oathbreaker—such an oath “may not be 
broken” but also one can be  an oathbreaker. Perhaps it means that the oath 
would psychologically affect an oathbreaker relentlessly and drive him to fulfill 
the oath. Further, it is clear that the oath is a rash oath —an evil oath. It is 
described as “terrible,” “dread words,” and the narrator plainly says that “none 
should take” such an oath. A particularly evil part of the oath is that it names 
even good people as enemies if they should keep a Silmaril from them.  
 Before examining how the oath works in the rest of The Silmarillion, we 
should note that Morgoth does not fear this oath, despite it being primarily an 
oath to attack him unceasingly. On the contrary, Morgoth likes the oath because 
he understands how it drives the sons of Fëanor to ruinous deeds. Chapter 
twenty-three of The Silmarillion says: 
 
Morgoth thought that his triumph was fulfilled, recking little of the sons 
of Fëanor, and of their oath, which had harmed him never and turned 
always to his mightiest aid; and in his black thought he laughed, 
regretting not the one Silmaril that he had lost, for by it as he deemed the 
last shred of the people of the Eldar should vanish from Middle-earth and 
trouble it no more. If he knew of the dwelling by the waters of Sirion, he 
gave no sign, biding his time, and waiting upon the working of oath and 
lie. (Silm 23.233)7  
 
Morgoth is, of course, right about this. At three previous points the narrator has 
said that the oath hurt the elves. First, in the curse of Mandos the elves hear that, 
“On the House of Fëanor the wrath of the Valar lieth from the West unto the 
uttermost East, and upon all that will follow them it shall be laid also. Their Oath 
shall drive them, and yet betray them, and ever snatch away the very treasures 
that they have sworn to pursue” ( Silm 9.78). Second, in chapter twelve about 
men, the narrator describes how the Elves and Men strove together against 
Morgoth but failed, and the narrator mentions one of the mechanisms by which 
 
6 Throughout Tolkien’s other writings on the oath, there is great consistency in it being 
described as unbreakable (The Lays of Beleriand 36, 162–63, 253–54, 259).  
7 “Even the loss of the Silmaril aided [Melkor], for the Oath of Maedhros and the Doom of 
the Noldor caused his enemies to slay each other” (Foster 322–23).  
The Liberty to Bind Oneself: Chesterton and the Oath of Fëanor 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  87 
they fail to be the oath of Fëanor, listed along with Morgoth’s lies (12.94). Third, 
when Maedhros is gathering strength for the Nirnaeth Arnoediad, it is said that 
the oath prevented him from gathering more strength, especially that of 
Orodreth (Nargothrond) and Thingol (Doriath). Due to the acts of the sons of 
Fëanor which stemmed from their oath Orodreth is not allies with the sons, and 
they are openly enemies with Thingol (20.179).  
 How does the oath function? How does Tolkien present it as affecting 
those who took it? The language used consistently is that the oath has a power 
to force the action of the sons of Fëanor. 8 Chesterton said that an oath included 
“the liberty to bind myself” ( Orthodoxy 130). This is what we see consistently 
throughout The Silmarillion. The oath -takers are bound by their oath and feel 
forced to act upon it. Tolkien uses language which implies this binding power, 
and the plot shows characters being forced by their oath to act against their 
better judgment.  
Twice it is said that the oath “drives” the sons. First in the curse of 
Mandos “Their Oath shall drive them,” and then Finrod Felagund says to Beren 
about the sons of Fëanor, “the Oath drives them” ( Silm 9.78 and 19.159). Twice 
it is said that the oath “constrains” them. First, following Fëanor’s death when 
Maedhros is captured by Morgoth and tells the Noldor to abandon their war in 
exchange for Maedhros’s freedom, the sons are unable to agree to these te rms 
because “they were constrained also by their oath , and might not for any cause 
forsake the war against their Enemy” (13.98). Second, after Beren and Lúthien 
successfully take a Silmaril from Morgoth, the sons of Fëanor ask Thingol for it: 
“Maedhros and his brothers, being constrained by their oath had be fore sent to 
Thingol and reminded him with haughty words of their claim, summoning him 
to yield the Silmaril” (20.179). Once it is said that Maedhros “was bound by the 
oath,” and thus he could not abandon the leaguer around Angband (13.102). The 
language Tolkien uses in these places clearly implies that the oath has binding 
power over the sons of Fëanor. These five places are the clearest linguistic signs 
of convergence between Tolkien and Chesterton concerning oaths —that the 
oath binds the oath-taker.  
At three key additional places in The Silmarillion  Tolkien uses other 
language which does not so clearly imply the binding power of the oath that 
Chesterton describes. But it remains clear in the plot that the oath forces the sons 
of Fëanor to act, thus its binding power is still present. Accordingly, usi ng 
Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths as a lens is helpful because it reminds the 
 
8 Others have noted the driving power of the oath: “In Middle-earth the House of Fëanor, 
led by Maedhros, often tried to act with moderation, but the fateful pressure of the Oath of 
Fëanor subverted their intentions, and time after time the sons of Fëanor, impelled by their desire 
for the Silmaril, became enmeshed in treachery and violence” (Foster 258, emphasis added).  
Matthew McKenna 
88  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
reader that the oath still binds the sons of Fëanor at these three pivotal moments. 
In these three places the oath drives the sons to do terrible deeds which they 
know are evil. These are the most critical acts which the oath drives them to 
commit. Importantly, before they commit these acts, they sometimes repent of 
the previous evil deeds which their oath drove them to do. This shows that 
Tolkien’s understanding of the way that oaths function is thoroughly 
Chestertonian in that oaths limit the person’s choices in the future and force the 
oath-taker to act according to his oaths, even against what he knows is right.  
The first place this appears is when Dior possesses the Silmaril and the 
sons of Fëanor demand it back (this takes place after Thingol is killed by 
dwarves, the dwarves sack Menegroth, Beren reclaimed the Silmaril with the 
help of the Ents, and Luthien wea rs it until her death). When Dior refuses, the 
sons of Fëanor attack Doriath. The narrator describes the chain of events: 
 
But now the rumor ran among the scattered Elves of Beleriand that Dior 
Thingol’s heir wore the Nauglamir [a necklace with a Silmaril set in it], 
and they said: “A Silmaril of Fëanor burns again in the woods of 
Doriath”; and the oath of the sons of Fëanor was waked again from sleep. 
For while Lúthien wore the Necklace of the Dwarves no Elf would dare 
assail her; but now hearing of the renewal of Doriath and of Dior’s pride 
the seven gathered again from wandering, and they sent to him to claim 
their own. (Silm 22.225) 
 
While not explicitly saying that the oath drives them, it is clear that the waking 
of the oath is a causal factor in their demanding the Silmaril from Dior. Lúthien’s 
beauty was too great and terrible. Her greatness made it impossible for them to 
reclaim the Silmaril, so they waited as they did when Morgoth held it (and while 
he still holds the other two). But now that the Silmaril has come to Dior, they 
have some chance to reclaim it (it is possible for them to reclaim it), and thus 
they try to.  
 The second time is when sons of Fëanor learn that the Silmaril is kept 
at the mouth of the river Sirion by Elwing and attack the elven havens to reclaim 
it. Tolkien writes: 
 
Now when first the tidings came to Maedhros that Elwing yet lived, and 
dwelt in possession of the Silmaril by the mouths of Sirion, he repenting 
of the deeds in Doriath withheld his hand. But in time the knowledge of 
the oath unfulfilled returned to tormen t him and his brothers, and 
gathering from their wandering hunting-paths they sent messages to the 
Havens of friendship and yet of stern demand. Then Elwing and the 
people of Sirion would not yield the jewel which Beren had won and 
Lúthien had worn [...]. And so there came to pass the last and cruelest of 
The Liberty to Bind Oneself: Chesterton and the Oath of Fëanor 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  89 
the slayings of Elf by Elf; and that was the third of the great wrongs 
achieved by the accursed oath. (Silm 24.236) 
  
Again, there is no direct description of the oath driving the sons, but given that 
Maedhros repented of earlier deeds from the oath —slaying Dior9—and yet the 
sons again assault other elves, it seems that the oath drove them. Also, the 
narrator indicates that the unfulfilled oath had a causal role in making them ask 
for the Silmaril and then attack when it was not yielded. So, again Tolkien uses 
other language, but it remains clear that the oath is forcing the sons to act. This 
episode is especially important for it follows the sons’ regret of their previous 
assault on Doriath (which the oath drove them to do), yet they assault the elven 
havens. This emphasizes the binding power of the oath.  
 The third time Tolkien uses other language to describe the oath driving 
the sons to act is after the Great Battle when the host of Valinor defeats Morgoth. 
The remaining two Silmarils are taken from Morgoth and Eönwë keeps them 
until the host returns to Valinor. Maedhros and Maglor (the only sons of Fëanor 
left alive at this point in the story) “prepared, though now with weariness and 
loathing, to attempt in despair the fulfillment of their oath; for they would have 
given battle for the Silmarils, were the y withheld, even against the victorious 
host of Valinor, even though they stood alone against the world. And they sent 
a message therefore to Eönwë, bidding him yield up now those jewels” ( Silm 
24.242). Eönwë replies that the evils deeds provoked by the oath have destroyed 
any right to the Silmarils that the sons formerly had —Eönwë does not say that 
their oath is void, only that their right to the Silmarils is void (24.242). He then 
instructs Maedhros and Maglor to return to Valinor to face the judgment of the 
Valar regarding their actions, their oath, and their claim on the Silmarils. At this 
point Maglor wants to return to Valinor and hopes to fulfill the oath through the 
mercy of the Valar. But Maedhros argues that if the Valar do not pardon them, 
then their oath would be impossible to fulfill. He also points out that Manwe 
does not have the power to release them from their oath since they made it to 
Ilúvatar, not Manwë. 10 Maglor thinks that trying to fulfill the oath by force, 
again, would be a worse evil than leaving the oath unfulfilled, but he eventually 
yields to Maedhros and they attack at night and successfully regain the Silmarils 
 
9 Maedhros also repented of this deed earlier in the story, immediately after his attack on 
Doriath (Silm 22.226).  
10 This was mentioned previously as well: “The wise have said that the hour was not yet 
come, and that only one speaking in person for the cause of both Elves and Men, pleading 
for pardon on their misdeeds and pity on their woes, might move the counsels of t he 
Powers; and the oath of Fëanor perhaps even Manwë could not loose, until it found its end, and 
the sons of Fëanor relinquished the Silmarils, upon which they had laid their ruthless claim” (Silm 
23.233–34, emphasis added).  
Matthew McKenna 
90  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
(24.242–43). Yet, the Silmarils burn their hands and Maedhros recognizes that 
Eönwë was correct. Their claim on the Silmarils was void due to their crimes. 
Maedhros then reasons that, due to no longer having a claim on the Silmarils, 
the oath is void (24.243). So,  Eönwë’s point that they no longer have a right to 
possess the Silmarils further implies that the oath is void.  
Yet, despite the oath being void, it still drove them to act and steal the 
Silmarils. This is evidenced by the fact that they have previously regretted many 
acts that the oath drove them to commit, they tried to avoid further evils 
occasioned by the oath, and on this occasion they both are weary of the oath, but 
they still killed elves in order to steal the Silmarils. Maglor was not driven as 
strongly this time since he wanted to wait for the judgment of the Valar (the oath 
was not urgently driving him), this hints that the driving force of the now-void 
oath was indeed weaker. Thus, the oath’s driving force had diminished, but 
clearly still had some power despite being void. This further implies that the 
oath was not completely void, contrary to what Maedhros seems to conclude as 
the narrator explains, “But the jewel burned the hand of Maedhros in pain 
unbearable; and he perceived that it was as Eönwë had said, and that his right 
thereto had become void, and that the oath was vain” (Silm 24.243).  
It seems this can be explained by the fact that the oath simply names 
the Silmarils to Fëanor and his sons and does not explicitly base this claim on 
any rightful sense of ownership (such as the fact that Fëanor made them), 
“vowing to pursue with vengeance  and hatred to the ends of the World Vala, 
Demon, Elf or Man as yet unborn, or any creature, great or small, good or evil, 
that time should bring forth unto the end of days, whoso should hold or take or 
keep a Silmaril from their possession” ( Silm 9.73). T hus, when due to their 
crimes, the sons have lost any right to possess the Silmarils, their oath to try to 
possess the Silmarils still drives them. Basically, their oath was not well worded 
(i.e., based on justice) but instead was based on greed. It was ba sed on an 
excessive desire to possess the Silmarils. Thus, the oath still has driving force 
(i.e., is not totally void) despite the right to possess the Silmarils being null. The 
narrator’s prelude to these events also implies that the oath is not void: 
 
Maedhros and Maglor would not hearken, and they prepared, though 
now with weariness and loathing, to attempt in despair the fulfillment of 
their oath; for they would have given battle for the Silmarils, were they 
withheld, even against the victorious host of Valinor, even though they 
stood alone against the world. And they sent a message therefore to 
Eönwë, bidding him yield up now those jewels which of old Fëanor their 
father made and Morgoth stole from him. (Silm 24.242)  
 
This also portrays their claim to Eönwë as based on their right to the Silmarils, 
hence his response (that they no longer have a right to them) makes sense.  
The Liberty to Bind Oneself: Chesterton and the Oath of Fëanor 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  91 
 This fact (i.e., the bad wording of the oath which separates the oath 
from a rightful claim to possess the Silmarils), is a common motif in myth. John 
Holmes points out that such rash oaths bind the oath -taker to the letter of the 
oath and not to the spirit of the oath (Holmes 258). Sticking to the strict letter of 
the oath drives the sons to attack Eönwë.  
Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths makes it explicit that the oath binds 
the oath-taker; one cannot ignore one’s oath. The words of the oath have power 
over the oath-taker. Without the explicit knowledge of this given by Chesterton, 
a reader, especially a mo dern reader without a rich appreciation for oaths and 
their importance in ancient and medieval society, could easily be confused by 
the behavior of the sons of Fëanor and their adherence to the oath despite all the 
evil it has caused (and which they readily admit and repent of). Alexander Bruce 
will be shown to make just this mistake. In the three crucial places examined 
above, the oath drives the sons of Fëanor to evil deeds which Maglor and 
Maedhros repent of, but they keep finding themselves unable to br eak the oath 
they now hate. The repeating theme of their attacks on fellow elves followed by 
regret, only to do it all over again, makes little sense apart from the binding 
power of the oath (i.e., apart from Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths).  
 
RESPONSE TO ALEXANDER BRUCE 
 What are the results of the oath of Fëanor? Consistently throughout The 
Silmarillion the results are evil. As previously seen, Morgoth likes the oath and 
knows it makes the sons fight against the other elves. Specifically, it is the chief 
and explicit cause that drives the sons of Fëanor to attack Beren and Lúthien, 
Dior at Doriath, Elwing at Sirion, and Eönwë after Morgoth’s defeat.  
 Although the oath drives the sons to do many evil acts listed above, not 
all the sons are totally corrupted, specifically Maedhros and Maglor. As 
previously mentioned, Maedhros repents of the attack on Doriath and tries to 
find and rescue the sons of Dior  who had been released into the wild ( Silm 
22.225–26). Later, he tries to avoid attacking Sirion because he repents of the 
attack on Doriath and does not want to repeat it (24.236). After the attack on 
Sirion, Maglor “took pity upon Elros and Elrond, and h e cherished them, and 
love grew after between them, as little might be thought; but Maglor’s heart was 
sick and weary with the burden of the dreadful oath” (24.237). Maglor, like 
Maedhros, repents and, like Maedhros tried to do with Dior’s son, cares for Elros 
and Elrond (sons of Eärendil and Elwing). Both Maedhros and Maglor are glad 
when they see Eärendil’s star with the Silmaril rise in the sky: 
 
And when this new star was seen at evening, Maedhros spoke to Maglor 
his brother, and he said: “Surely that is a Silmaril that shines now in the 
West?” 
Matthew McKenna 
92  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
And Maglor answered: “If it be truly the Silmaril which we saw cast 
into the sea that rises again by the power of the Valar, then let us be glad; 
for its glory is seen now by many, and is yet secure from all evil.” ( Silm 
24.239–40)  
 
Instead of being possessive and angry that a Silmaril is out of their reach, they 
are glad that many people can now enjoy its light and beauty. This shows that 
they are not totally corrupted and greedy for the Silmaril as Fëanor was, who 
locked them away in Valinor and denied the sight of them to others, which led 
to their capture by Morgoth ( Silm 8.65).11 Finally, as seen, Maglor tries to avoid 
doing further evil in pursuit of the Silmarils when Eönwë takes them and 
Maedhros is said to seek them with “weariness and loathing” (24.242). The fact 
that Maedhros and Maglor are not completely corrupted, but stil l do terrible 
deeds (attacking fellow elves multiple times) due to the oath highlights the 
power of the oath —that it is driving or forcing them to act. This is similar to 
Chesterton’s novel The Man Who Was Thursday, wherein the characters take rash 
oaths (thus similar to the oath of Fëanor) but feel compelled to keep them, 
despite the evil outcomes from them (in Thursday these evil results are the 
anarchist plots potentially succeeding and hurting innocent civilians). Thus, 
both Tolkien and Chesterton portray their characters as compelled to keep rash 
oaths, despite the evil outcomes of doing so. This shows their shared belief in 
the binding power of vows.  
 Alexander Bruce disagrees with this moral analysis of Maedhros and 
Maglor and argues that they are ultimately villains : “Whatever their deeds of 
valor might have been, because of their commitment to the oath, in the end 
Maedhros and Maglor must be counted among the great foes of Middle -earth, 
as corrupt as Carcharoth, as corrupt as Morgoth himself” (Bruce 69). There are 
three issues with this reading.  
First, it seems absurd to claim they are as evil as Morgoth. The narrator 
consistently presents these two as trag ic and deeply flawed, but trying to be 
good. Indeed, after Maglor throws away his Silmaril he spends his remaining 
life in regret ( Silm 24.243). Thus, while Maedhros may be more of a Judas -like 
character who commits suicide after his great sin in despair (24.243), Maglor is 
more of a Peter -like character who repents of his great sin (but unlike Peter in 
the gospels, Maglor never rejoins th e commu nity). Maedhros also did not 
participate in the burning of the Teleri ships at Losgar (9.80). Early in the 
Silmarillion when the narrator describes the princes of the elves, Maglor is 
described as a mighty singer and Maedhros as merely “Maedhros the tall,” 
while other of the sons of Fëanor are described by less flattering terms —
 
11 For an analysis of Fëanor’s hiding of the Silmarils see Bernthal 108–09.  
The Liberty to Bind Oneself: Chesterton and the Oath of Fëanor 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  93 
“Caranthir the dark” (5.50).12 Second, Bruce’s reading overlooks the many times 
Maedhros and Maglor repent and try to avoid further evil (22.225 –26 and 
24.236–37).  
Third, Bruce’s argument overlooks what I have tried to prove in this 
paper—the driving force of the oath. Bruce claims it was precisely the brothers’ 
“commitment to the oath” that made them villains; they chose to fulfill the oath 
and thus continued to choose evil deeds until the end (69). But, as I have argued, 
they were not so much committed to the oath (in fact they resented it and Bruce 
earlier adm itted this [65]) as driven by it. Essentially, Bruce fails to see the 
binding power the oath has on them; he fails to see that they are not totally free 
to break their oath. Since they are driven by their oath, they are less free to ignore 
it. This suggests to us that we should rather pity them than condemn them. 
Especially in their final attack on Eönwë, Maedh ros and Maglor very much 
appear to desire to be free from their oath but are themselves its prisoner. 
Certainly, it is an evil act to attack Eönwë and try to reclaim the Silmarils. But 
they are not as morally culpable for this act (because they are not totally free) as 
Bruce wants to say. Therefore, Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths helpfully 
enlightens how the oath functions in The Silmarillion by making its binding 
power more explicit and clearer. This shows that we should soften our moral 
condemnations of Maedhros and Maglor. Thus, one practical effect of examining 
the oath of Fëanor through the lens of Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths is that it 
tempers our moral judgment of Maedhros and Maglor by showing they are not 
totally free to choose their acts due to the binding power of their oath.   
 
CONCLUSION 
 This paper has done several things. First, it has read the oath of Fëanor 
through the framework of Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths and has suggested 
that Tolkien may have been influenced by Chesterton’s philosophy of oaths by 
showing how strongly Chesterton’s philosophy is at work in the oath of Fëanor. 
Other oaths in Tolkien’s writings which could also be studied along similar 
lines: Thingol’s oath not to kill Beren, Beren’s o ath to retrieve the Silmaril, and 
especially Gollum’s oath to serve Frodo. 13 For both Chesterton and Tolkien, 
oaths are acts of freedom and will which bind the oath taker in the future. At the 
very least, this paper has demonstrated that Tolkien shares Chesterton’s view of 
oaths and their binding power. While in the real world, oaths do not absolutely 
necessitate or force our wills (people can break an oath), the presentation of the 
 
12 I read this as a moral descriptor and not a physical one. 
13 For more on oaths in Tolkien see Holmes 249 –61; for Gollum’s oath to Frodo see 
Donnelly 24 –25; for a comparison of Pippin’s oath to Denethor and Merry’s oath to 
Théoden see Bernthal 227–29.  
Matthew McKenna 
94  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
oath of Fëanor as having such true binding power highlights the seriousness of 
oaths in the real world.  
Second, this paper has nuanced a claim by Alexander Bruce about the 
oath of Fëanor. Specifically, he argues that Maedhros and Maglor are ultimately 
villains due to the oath. But Maedhros and Maglor are not unambiguously 
villains in The Silmarillion  and viewing their oath through the lens of 
Chesterton’s philosophy helps reveal this to us by making it explicit, rather than 
merely implicit in the story, that their oath bound them.  
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY  
Aquinas, Thomas. Summa Theologiae. Aquinas.cc.  
Augustine, Homily on the Sermon on the Mount. Newadvent.com.  
Bernthal, Craig. Tolkien’s Sacramental Vision: Discerning the Holy in Middle Earth . 
Angelico Press, 2014.  
Bruce, Alexander. “‘Or break it’: The Cost of Silmarils and Sworn Oaths .” Mythlore, 
vol. 42, no. 1, #143, 2023, pp. 55–74.  
Chesterton, G.K. “A Defense of Rash Vows.” The Defendant. Johnson, 1901.  
—. Orthodoxy. Ignatius Press, 1995.  
—. The Man Who Was Thursday: A Nightmare. Penguin Books, 1986.  
—. The Superstition of Divorce in The Collected Works of G.K. Chesterton: Vol. 4. Ignatius 
Press, 1987.  
Dei Verbum in The Sixteen Documents of Vatican II. Edited by Marianne Trouve. Pauline 
Books and Media, 1999.  
Donnelly, Colleen. “Feudal Values, Vassalage, and Fealty in The Lord of the Rings .” 
Mythlore, vol. 25, no. 3, 2007, pp. 17–27.  
Foster, Robert. The Complete Guide to Middle-earth: The Definitive Guide to the World of 
J.R.R. Tolkien. Harpercollins, 2022.  
Helms, Randel. Tolkien and the Silmarils. Houghton Mifflin, 1981.  
Holmes, John R. “Oaths and Oath Breaking.” Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A 
Reader, edited by Jane Chance, U of Kentucky P, 2004, pp. 249–61.  
Meier, John. Matthew. Michael Glazier, 1980,  
Milbank, Alison. Chesterton and Tolkien as Theologians: The Fantasy of the Real. T and T 
Clark, 2009.  
Pearce, Joseph. Tolkien: Man and Myth. Ignatius Press, 2019.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lays of Beleriand, edited by Christopher Tolkien, Ballantine Books, 
1985.  
—. The Silmarillion, edited by Christopher Tolkien. William Morrow, 2022.  
 
MATTHEW MCKENNA is a Ph.D candidate in Theology at Ave Maria University. He 
studies and teaches on the works of St. Thomas Aquinas, G.K. Chesterton, and J.R.R. 
Tolkien. 
 
  
  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  95 
 
 
                        ODELLING THE FEAR OF GOD  
                                        IN C.S.  LEWIS ’S  
                              THE CHRONICLES OF NARNIA  
 
                                               BRETT ROSCOE  
 
 
ART OF THE VALUE THAT C.S. LEWIS SAW IN MYTHOPOEIC LITERATURE  is its 
ability to affect readers, to evoke a rich emotional experience. He therefore 
believed a myth is not just something to be assented to, but something to be 
imagined and felt. “If God chooses to be mythopoeic,” he writes, “[…] shall we 
refuse to be mythopathic?” (“Myth Became Fact” 59 –60). In an article originally 
published in The New Yorker, he admits his hopes that The Chronicles of Narnia 
would have this mythopathic effect on readers: “I thought I saw how stories of 
this kind could steal past a certain inhibition which had paralysed much of my 
own religion in childhood. Why did one find it  so hard to feel as one was told 
one ought to feel about God or about the sufferings of Christ? I thought the chief 
reason was that one was told one ought to” (“S ometimes Fairy Stories” 57–58). 
The Narnia stories, he suggests, have the potential to evoke religious affect in 
readers, helping them learn how they ought to “feel about God,” but without 
the sense of duty that stifles such emotions. The goal of this article is to study 
one of thes e feelings about God —the fear of the Lord —as it is evoked by and 
represented in The Chronicles of Narnia . First I draw on psychological studies 
of emotion and the kinesic approach to literature developed by Guillemette 
Bolens to appreciate how the concrete imagery in Lewis’s books evoke a fear of 
Aslan. Then I place this fear in the context of Rudolf Otto’s The Idea of the Holy, 
looking at the influence this book had on Lewis’s assumptions about the fear of 
God and his depictions of Aslan. My basic argument is that, in The Chronicles 
of Narnia , the physical encounters with Aslan invite characters (and by 
extension readers) to experience the fear of the Lord, an emotion that Lewis 
portrays as analogous to, though significantly different from, other kinds of fear. 
 That creative literature can arouse emotions in readers is not a new 
insight. Aristotle, for example, famously defined the Greek tragedy by its 
emotional effects, saying that it arouses pity and fear in the audience (54). But 
what more recent cognitive ap proaches to literature demonstrate is how much 
goes on in our brains underneath the surface when we read. Two insights in 
particular concern me in this study. The first has to do with the quick emotional 
and physiological responses that can be triggered by  texts. Cognitive literary 
theorist Patrick Colm Hogan writes that there are three sources of emotion: (1) 
P 
Brett Roscoe 
96  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
innate sensitivities, (2) critical period developments (i.e. childhood experiences), 
and (3) emotional memories (57).1 The first of these, innate sensitivities, is often 
exemplified in cognitive science with reference to fear. As cognitive scientist 
Joseph Ledoux puts it, “Each species is innately prepared to treat certain stimuli 
as threatening. Innate/prepared threats i nclude pictures of people with facial 
expressions of anger or fear, or pictures of venomous animals like snakes and 
spiders” (203). Studies of the amygdala, a part of the brain that is activated when 
a person feels fear, demonstrate that it is sensitive an d can be activated by an 
angry facial expression, a sudden sound or movement, or by the sighting of a 
dangerous animal. Our innate threat sensors are so sensitive, in fact, that they 
can arouse a fear state even before we are conscious of any fear. In one study, 
adults with fears of snakes or spiders were shown images of these threatening 
animals, but the images were shown so briefly that the adults did not notice 
them consciously or report any feeling of fear, and yet their minds reacted with 
a fear state nonetheless (Kagan 105). 2 We might say that the subjects had a 
“‘ghost’ feeling,” a partial, unconscious experience of fear. 3 As this and other 
studies demonstrate, the cause of the activation does not need to be real; a mere 
picture or mental image is sufficient. And, as will be demonstrated below, The 
Chronicles of Narnia provide plenty of such threatening images of the lion 
Aslan, focusing on his roars, his teeth, and his claws and thereby evoking an 
experience of fear. 
 The second insight of cognitive approaches to literature that concerns 
me here is the growing realization that reading—like thinking in general—is an 
embodied experience. As Raymond W. Gibbs puts it, “ the brain does not work 
in isolation, but is part of an organic whole that includes the nervous system and 
kinesthetic sensations of the body in action” (279).  Studies using fMRI scans 
have demonstrated that when a person reads action words like “kick,” “chew,” 
or “run,” their motor and premotor cortex is act ivated in a way similar to how 
they would be activated if the person were physically performing the motion 
(Hauk, et al. 301 –07; Pulvervmüller, et al. 793 –97). This effect is called “motor 
resonance,” “the process by which action observation activates the same neural 
substrates as those recruited when a perceiver performs an action by 
themselves” (Bellock and Lyons 21). The experience of motor resonance 
suggests that readers create perceptual simulations when they read, enacting the 
spatial orientation, mov ements, and gestures described by a text. This insight 
from neuroscience has been applied to literary texts by Guillemette Bolens in 
 
1 This threefold division is similar to Jerome Kagan’s typology of fear. Kagan identifies 
three kinds of fear: fear of innate threats, conditioned (learned) fear, and fear of the 
unfamiliar (89–95). 
2 Cf. Ledoux 203–05. 
3 I have taken the phrase “ghost feeling” from Terence Cave (36). 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  97 
The Style of Gestures. Bolens develops a kind of reading called “kinesic analysis,” 
a method of reading that pays especial attention to the ways in which texts 
“trigger sensorimotor perceptual simulations in the reader” (28). This kind of 
reading foregrounds minute details of gesture, facial expression, motion, and 
bodily orientation, details that are often passed over in analyses of literary texts. 
In The Chronicles of Narnia , it is precisely details such as these that allow 
readers to create perceptual si mulations of the strength and power of the lion 
Aslan and to enact the trembling, freezing, running away, and stumbling of the 
characters who encounter this fearsome, divine presence. 
 Such an approach, I believe, can do justice to the concrete ways Lewis 
portrays God in this series. Jesus is famously portrayed as Aslan, a lion, and 
while the lion might be a reference to the “lion of Judah,” one of Jesus’ biblical 
titles ( ESV Bible, Rev. 5:5), 4 and while the lion might symbolically represent 
qualities of God —qualities such as strength, power, and royalty —at the same 
time the image of the lion is not something to be abstracted and discarded. This 
is the very mistake made by the Narnian horse Bree . Sharing his “knowledge” 
of Aslan with the Calormene girl Aravis, Bree explains that when Narnians call 
Aslan a lion, they “of course” do not actually mean he is a lion: 
 
“No doubt,” continued Bree, “when they speak of him as a Lion they only 
mean he’s as strong as a lion or [...] as fierce as a lion. Or something of 
that kind. Even a little girl like you, Aravis, must see that it would be 
quite absurd to suppose he is a real lion. Indeed it would be disrespectful. 
If he was a lion he’d have to be a Beast just like the rest of us. Why! [...] If 
he was a lion he’d have four paws, and a tail, and Whiskers!” (The Horse 
and His Boy 14.200)5 
 
What Bree does not realize is that, during this lengthy attempt to allegorize the 
lion, the actual lion himself has walked up behind him. And when Bree 
mentions the “absurd” thought of Aslan having whiskers, Aslan’s whiskers 
brush his ear, causing Bree to jump and run to the other side of the garden. It 
turns out that the very qualities Bree ridicules —the paws, the tail, the 
whiskers—are some of the most important qualities of Aslan. These physical 
qualities are, for example, emphasized in the prophecy of A slan’s coming, a 
prophecy the Pevensie children hear in The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe (LWW): 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Lewis himself makes this biblical connection (Letters III.160). 
5 All citations to The Chronicles of Narnia books are to chapter and page number. 
Brett Roscoe 
98  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Wrong will be right, when Aslan comes in sight,  
At the sound of his roar, sorrows will be no more,  
When he bares his teeth, winter meets its death, 
And when he shakes his mane, we shall have spring again.  
(8.79, emphasis added) 
 
Lewis repeatedly emphasizes the physical qualities of Aslan, never letting his 
readers forget that Aslan is, in fact, a lion, complete with mane, teeth, and claws. 
And in so far as Aslan is a lion, he is, from a human standpoint, a danger and a 
threat, or, in other words, something to be feared. In a letter Lewis admits that 
his Narnia stories were inspired by his “nightmares about lions” (Letters III.807), 
suggesting that he associated this animal with the emotion fear. And it is the 
threatening, fearsome qualities of lions that are emphasized in The Chronicles 
of Narnia.  
 Aslan’s mouth is foregrounded through the frequent roars and 
rumblings. When the White Witch suggests that Aslan might not be true to his 
word, Aslan does not argue or offer any assurances; instead he puts on a display 
of power: “‘Wow!’ roared Aslan half rising from his throne; and his great mouth 
opened wider and wider and the roar grew louder and louder, and the Witch, 
after staring for a moment with her lips wide apart, picked up her skirts and 
fairly ran for her life” ( LWW 13.144). The mouth opening “w ider and wider” 
draws our attention to one of the most dangerous parts of the lion, a detail that 
is not lost on the Witch, nor on the Pevensie children. The children want to ask 
Aslan about his discussion with the Witch, but Aslan’s “face was stern and 
everyone’s ears were still ringing with the sound of his roar and so nobody 
dared” (14.145). The roar is thus experienced as a fearsome event by both 
enemies and friends of the lion. In fact, anyone, even an endearing character like 
Lucy, can become a target  of the lion’s roar. While looking through a magical 
book, Lucy is tempted to use a spell that she knows she should not. Before she 
gives into the temptation, though, she sees something she does not expect:  
 
[W]hen she looked back at the opening words of the spell, there in the 
middle of the writing, where she felt quite sure there had been no picture 
before, she found the great face of a lion, of the Lion, Aslan himself, 
staring into hers. It was painted such  a bright gold that it seemed to be 
coming towards her out of the page; and indeed she never was quite sure 
afterwards that it hadn’t really moved a little. At any rate she knew the 
expression on his face quite well. He was growling and you could see 
most of his teeth. She became horribly afraid and turned over the page at 
once. (The Voyage of the “Dawn Treader” [VDT] 10.154–55) 
 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  99 
Here the sound of growling is not necessarily heard, but it is nevertheless 
experienced through the facial expression of the lion, who bares his teeth in a 
threatening gesture. Aslan often refrains from speech, instead using growls and 
other gestures to communicate. In Prince Caspian (PC), Lucy sees Aslan, but does 
not follow him because the other members of her party do not believe Aslan is 
there. Upon meeting Aslan, Lucy starts making excuses for her behaviour, and 
these excuses are only met with physical  messages: “’I saw you all right. They 
wouldn’t believe me. They’re all so —’ From somewhere deep inside Aslan’s 
body there came the faintest suggestion of a growl” (10.142). This growl, which 
is more felt than heard, is Aslan’s way of telling Lucy that she should not blame 
others for her own shortcomings. Apparently, the growl can say more than one 
thing, and Aslan communicates through it on more than one occasion. In The 
Last Battle (LB), he roars a command to wake the giant Time (13.170), and then 
later he growls to challenge the false teaching that Aslan and Tash are the same 
god (15.188–89). 
Often these roars and growls result in shaking or trembling of some 
sort, showing Aslan to be an unsettling presence both emotionally and 
physically. In Prince Caspian, for example, Aslan commands silence in a voice 
that even moves the ground: “‘Peace,’ said Aslan in the low voice which was 
nearest to his growl. The earth seemed to shake a little and every living thing in 
the grove became still as stone” (15.216 –17). The humans and animals respond 
to this shaking with one of the most typical responses to fe ar. According to 
Ledoux, most animals, including humans, have three choices when reacting to 
fear: “freeze first; flee if you can; and fight if you must” (54). When the animals 
and humans hear Aslan’s roar, they feel the earth shake and they become frozen 
in fear. Whether by freezing suddenly, running away, or trembling and shaking, 
humans, animals, and the land itself respond in bodily fear to Aslan’s roars and 
rumbles. 
 The other weapons of the lion, his claws, are also foregrounded in these 
stories. They are sometimes mentioned directly and sometimes hinted at by 
mention of the lion’s paws. The main characters in The Horse and His Boy go on a 
mission of urgency in a race to warn the king of Archenland about an imminent 
attack. Somehow, though, they find themselves going slower than they need to, 
lacking the motivation to run as fast as they can, at least until the lion Aslan 
gives them the “new strength of fear” (11.164), chasing after them from behind, 
snapping at them with his mouth and even attacking Aravis: “The lion rose on 
its hind legs, larger than you would have believed a lion could be, and jabbed at 
Aravis with its right paw. Shasta could see all the terrible claws extended. Aravis 
screamed and reeled in the saddle. The lion was tearing her shoulders” (10.144). 
We later discover that Aslan is not trying to kill Aravis; he is instead trying to 
punish or discipline her for causing her stepmother’s servant to be bea ten 
Brett Roscoe 
100  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
(14.201–02). For Aravis, then, the discipline of God mentioned frequently in the 
Bible (for example in Prov. 3:11–12 or Heb. 12:5–6) is not some abstract idea but 
a bodily experience made concrete by the swipes of the lion’s claws. Similarly, 
in The Voyage of the “Dawn Treader,” Eustace is transformed into a dragon, and 
he finds that the only way to get rid of his scales and become human again is 
with the help of Aslan’s claws. After the experience, Eustace says, “I was afraid 
of his claws, I can tell you [...]. The very first te ar he made was so deep that I 
thought it had gone right into my heart. And when he began pulling the skin 
off, it hurt worse than anything I’ve ever felt” (7.108 –09). Here Eustace learns 
that “to put off [the] old self” and “to put on the new self” as Paul  describes 
Christian transformation in Ephesians (4:22, 24), is much more difficult and 
much more painful than changing t-shirts, and any reader who has ripped off a 
scab or a band aid can imagine—and through this mental simulation somewhat 
experience—Eustace’s pain. 
Even when the claws are not mentioned explicitly, they are hinted at 
by the mention of Aslan’s paws and the gestures he makes with them. When the 
Pevensies first meet Aslan, the lion’s paws quickly become the focus of the 
narrative: “The Lion shook his man e and clapped his paws together (‘Terrible 
paws,’ thought Lucy, ‘If he didn’t know how to velvet them!’)” ( LWW 12.129). 
A little later, when speaking with Peter, Aslan lays his paw on Peter’s shoulder, 
and the narrator points out that “though it was velvet ed it was very 
heavy”(LWW 12.129). By telling us the paw is velveted, the narrator reminds us 
that there are dangerous claws hidden in it, and the weight of the paw suggests 
the strength behind those claws.6 
 There are, admittedly, numerous scenes in the Narnia books that 
describe an intimacy between Aslan and other characters, who touch his fur and 
his mane, kiss him and receive licks of his tongue, and even play with him. After 
Aslan is killed on the Stone Table, he comes back to life and begins to play with 
Lucy and Susan. The girls run around trying to catch Aslan’s tail, and they roll 
around together in a “laughing heap of fur and arms and legs” ( LWW 15.164). 
But even this playful description never completely loses sight of the lion’s power 
and potential danger. Lucy has a hard time deciding whether playing with 
Aslan is “more like playing with a thunderstorm or playing with a kitten” 
(15.164). Details like this, or the combination of intimate experiences o f Aslan 
with the roars and growls described above suggest that the dangers of the lion 
may be backgrounded, but they never disappear completely. Lucy, Susan, and 
other human and animal characters can become intimate with Aslan, but not 
familiar with him; he is not an animal to be taken for granted.  
 
6 An argument could similarly be made that Aslan’s gentle carrying of Jill in his mouth 
reminds readers Aslan has dangerous teeth and jaws (Lewis, The Silver Chair [SC] 8.117). 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  101 
 The lion Aslan may symbolically represent God, or more specifically 
Jesus Christ, but he is experienced physically by characters and imaginatively 
by readers as a lion, a wild animal whose strength and size is itself a threat to 
humans, and this threat is a constant in the Narnia books. Even though various 
characters learn to trust and depend on Aslan, there is never any assurance that 
this lion is completely safe. In an often -quoted part of LWW, Susan and Lucy, 
surprised to hear that Aslan is a lion, ask whether he is safe, seeking some sort 
of assurance, but that assurance is never given: 
 
“Ooh!” said Susan, “I’d thought he was a man. Is he —quite safe? I 
shall feel rather nervous about meeting a lion.” 
“That you will, dearie, and no mistake,” said Mrs. Beaver, “if there’s 
anyone who can appear before Aslan without their knees knocking, 
they’re either braver than most or else just silly.” 
“Then he isn’t safe?” said Lucy. 
“Safe?” said Mr. Beaver. “Don’t you hear what Mrs. Beaver tells you? 
Who said anything about safe? “Course he isn’t safe. But he’s good.” (8.79–80) 
 
Instead of trying to rid Susan and Lucy of fear, Mrs. Beaver says that “knees 
knocking,” a physical sign of fear, is the appropriate response to such a being. 
In The Silver Chair, when Aslan asks Jill to drink from a stream of water, Jill asks 
for similar assurances of safety, and these assurances are again denied: 
   
“Will you promise not to—do anything to me, if I do come?” said Jill. 
“I make no promise,” said the Lion. 
Jill was so thirsty now that, without noticing it, she had come a step nearer. 
“Do you eat girls?” she said. 
“I have swallowed up girls and boys, women and men, kings and 
emperors, cities and realms,” said the Lion. (2.22) 
 
Aslan does not respond with “Don’t worry. I won’t hurt you” or any other such 
assurances, but instead with a comment that would only make Jill more 
uncomfortable. When characters encounter Aslan —the God -figure in the 
stories—fear is an important emotion, not something to overcome and get rid of. 
However, important as the concrete details of Aslan are, this fear of 
God is for Lewis more than just a fear of lions. In portraying the experience of 
God as he does in these books, Lewis reveals an understanding of the fear of the 
Lord that is influenced by Rudolf Otto’s The Idea of the Holy, a now-classic study 
of religious experience published in German in 1917 and first translated into 
English in 1923. While Corbin Scott Carnell claims that Lewis read and was 
influenced by Otto’s book in the 1920s (96),  I believe Adam Barkman is correct 
Brett Roscoe 
102  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
when he argues that Lewis first encountered the book in 1936 since this is when, 
in a letter, Lewis mentions purchasing a copy (Barkman 123; Lewis, Letters II.204). 
Lewis’s subsequent correspondences and nonfictional writings 
provide evidence of the favourable impression this book made on him. In one 
letter he claims that he was “deeply influenced” by Otto’s book ( Letters III.980). 
In two letters he recommends the book to others (II.528 –20, III.125–26), and on 
other occasions Lewis makes mention of the “numinous,” a term coined by Otto 
and popularized by his book. In a letter to Martyn Skinner dated December 31st, 
1959, for example, Lewis challenges Skinner to make his  writing “numinous,” 
assuming this is a quality of powerful storytelling ( Letters III.1118–19).7 In The 
Problem of Pain, Lewis mentions Otto by name and lists the numinous as one of 
the three strands or elements of “developed religion” (4 –9). Later, in an essay 
originally published in 1952, Lewis cites Otto’s book and says that “the seed of 
religious experience” is located “in our experience of the Numinous” (“Is 
Theism Important?” 189). Then, near the end of his life, when The Christian 
Century asked him what books had influenced him most, Lewis listed ten books, 
including Otto’s The Idea of the Holy (“Ex Libris” 719). 
According to Barkman, however, “influence” might be too strong of a 
word. Barkman argues that Lewis’s thinking had already developed in ways 
that were merely re -affirmed by Otto’s book (Barkman 132). Nevertheless, 
Barkman admits that certain of Otto’s idea s, such as the description of the 
mysterium tremendum, seem to have left a mark on Lewis (129). 8 The connection 
between Lewis’s works and Otto’s the numinous has been noted before, but 
usually with only a cursory treatment. 9 One important exception, the study by 
Barkman, provides an extended treatment of the topic, but whereas his focus is 
on how Otto’s book relates to Lewis’s concept of joy, my focus in the rest of this 
article will be on how Otto’s concept of the numinous c an help us understand 
the fear of God in the Narnia books.   
 Both Lewis and Otto are interested in religious experience, in how 
people encounter the divine. Otto’s book is largely about a quality of religious 
experience that he calls “numinous,” a difficult concept that includes various 
emotional responses to the divine, including the fear of the Lord. He claims that 
the numinous cannot b e precisely described by language, and so any study of 
the numinous must proceed through metaphors and analogies, comparisons 
 
7 Also see a letter to Sister Penelope where he comments on Penelope’s description of a 
haunted island in relation to Otto’s book: “I was interested in your account of the haunted 
island of your childhood —a good example of what Otto would call the lowest gr ade of 
the ‘Numinous’“ (Letters II.285). 
8 The mysterium tremendum is discussed in more detail below. 
9 See, for example, Como 74, 234–35; Duriez 357; Christopher 117; Carnell 57, 96; and the 
slightly more extended discussion in Downing 33–34, 109–10, 128–30. 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  103 
and contrasts. “This X of ours,” he says, meaning the numinous, “is not precisely 
this experience, but akin to this one and the opposite of that other” (Otto 7). So 
when Otto talks about an emotional aspect of the numinous that he calls the 
“mysterium tremendum ,” he explains the concept with recourse to everyday 
emotional terms like fear, but he stresses that these “ordinary” emotions are 
analogies of the numinous: “‘Tremor’ is in itself merely the perfectly familiar 
and ‘natural’ emotion of fear,” he says, “But here the term is taken aptly enough 
but still only by analogy, to denote a quite specific kind of emotional response, 
wholly distinct from that of being afraid, though it so far resembles it that the 
analogy of fear may be used to throw light upon its nature” (13). 
 In the same way, Lewis portrays the fear of the Lord as a numinous, 
emotive experience that is related analogically to ordinary fears. The fear of the 
Lord is indeed “what is often called fear, but of a different kind” (The Problem of 
Pain 5). In The Problem of Pain , Lewis points to The Wind in the Willows for an 
example, quoting a part of the story when Rat and Mole approach the god Pan: 
 
“Rat,” he found breath to whisper, shaking. “Are you afraid?”  
“Afraid?” murmured the Rat, his eyes shining with unutterable 
love. “Afraid? of Him? O, never, never! And yet—and yet—O, Mole, I am 
afraid!” (Grahame 7.77; Lewis, The Problem of Pain 6) 
 
Rat is not afraid and yet afraid because he is experiencing a numinous fear, an 
experience akin to but different from regular fear. Similar language can be found 
scattered throughout The Chronicles of Narnia. In The Silver Chair, when Jill first 
encounters Aslan, she is at first—and understandably—afraid because she is in 
front of a lion. But when that lion speaks, her emotional experience takes on a 
numinous quality: “Anyway, she had seen its lips move this time, and the voice 
was not like a man’s. It was deeper, wilder, and stronger; a sort of heavy, golden 
voice. It did not make her any less frightened than she had been before, but it 
made her frightened in rather a different way” (2.22). In The Voyage of the “Dawn 
Treader,” Eustace likewise experiences a strange fear, even though he is in the 
shape of a strong dragon. He says, “[The lion] came nearer and nearer. I was 
terribly afraid of it. You may think that, being a dragon, I could have knocked 
any lion out easily enough. But it wasn’t that kind of fear. I wasn’t afraid of it 
eating me, I was just afraid of it—if you can understand” (7.106 –07). A final 
example can be found in The Horse and His Boy, when Shasta finds himself face-
to-face with the lion: “Shasta was no longer afraid that the Voice belonged to 
something that would eat him, nor that it was the voice of a ghost. But a new 
and different sort of trembling came over him. Yet he felt glad too” (11.165). In 
all these examples, the characters describe their experience a s one of fear, but 
they also distinguish that fear qualitatively from regular fear.  
Brett Roscoe 
104  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 The final example above also suggests how these two fears are 
different, for Shasta experiences a gladness at the same time that he is afraid. 
Similarly, Peter, Susan, and Lucy upon seeing Aslan feel “as glad as anyone can 
who feels afraid, and as afraid as anyone can who feels glad” ( PC 11.153). This 
strange combination of emotions points to another part of the numinous as Otto 
describes it in The Idea of the Holy . Otto argues that there are two sides to a 
numinous experience, the mysterium tremendum et fascinans, or the daunting and 
the fascinating: “The daemonic-divine object may appear to the mind an object 
of horror and dread, but at the same time it is no less something that allures with 
a potent charm, and the creature, who trembles before it, utterly cowed and cast 
down, has always at the same time the impulse to turn to it” (31). We can see 
this paradox at work in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, when Peter says of 
Aslan, “I’m longing to see him […] even if I do feel frightened when it comes to 
the point” (8.80). Similarly, when Digory and Polly first encounter Aslan in The 
Magician’s Nephew, they experience a combination of fear and desire:  
 
The children could not move. They were not even quite sure that they 
wanted to. The Lion paid no attention to them. Its huge red mouth was 
open, but open in song not in a snarl. It passed by them so close that they 
could have touched its mane. They were terribly afraid it would turn and 
look at them, yet in some queer way they wished it would. (9.116–17) 
 
This mixture of fear and desire or tremendum et fascinans  is also displayed 
somewhat humorously by Hwin, one of the talking horses in The Horse and His 
Boy. When Hwin approaches Aslan, she is “shaking all over” with fear, but she 
approaches nevertheless and says, “Please [...] you’re so beautiful. You may eat 
me if you like. I’d sooner be eaten by you than fed by anyone else” (14.200–01). 
 This paradoxical fear and attraction is one of the most important 
qualities that separates the fear of God from other types of fear. Lewis describes 
the difference between regular fear and fear of God in his essay “Is Theism 
Important?”:  
 
We have in English an exact name for the emotion aroused by the 
Numinous, which Otto, writing in German lacked; we have the word 
Awe—an emotion very like fear, with the important difference that it 
need imply no estimate of danger. When we fear a tiger, we  fear that it 
may kill us: when we fear a ghost —well, we just fear the ghost, not this 
or that mischief which it may do us. The Numinous or Awful is that of which 
we have this, as it were, objectless or disinterested fear—this awe. (189)10 
 
 
10 The example of a tiger and a ghost is repeated in Lewis, The Problem of Pain 5. 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  105 
This awe is so similar to fear that Lewis repeats the word “fear” at the end of the 
passage, even after having made a distinction between the two terms, but they 
are at the same time significantly different. Base or regular fear, for Lewis, is a 
self-directed emotion that encourages people to look out for their own safety. 
This kind of fear is usually demonstrated by the morally deprived characters in 
the books, characters who encounter Aslan and run away from him to save their 
lives. In Prince Caspian, for example, Aslan, accompanied by Bacchus and the 
dancing Maenads, leads a rowdy procession through a town, and all of the 
townspeople respond with one of two responses to the sight of Aslan: people 
either run away from or join the procession, and their resp onses imply a 
judgement about their moral character. For instance, when they come upon a 
school with an overly strict teacher, one student (Gwendolyn) is drawn to Aslan, 
whereas the teacher and the rest of the students —whom the narrator criticizes 
as “dump y, prim little girls with fat legs” —all run away (14.200). This same 
divisive effect—some fleeing, some approaching —is seen repeatedly as Aslan 
makes his way through the town. 
Returning to The Magician’s Nephew we see a similar contrast between 
the fear of Digory and Polly on the one hand and the fear of the Witch and Uncle 
Andrew on the other: 
 
Though [Aslan’s] soft pads made no noise, you could feel the earth shake 
beneath their weight.  
         The Witch shrieked and ran: in a few moments she was out of sight 
among the trees. Uncle Andrew turned to do likewise, tripped over a 
root, and fell flat on his face in a little brook that ran down to join the 
river. The children could not move. T hey were not even quite sure that 
they wanted to. The Lion paid no attention to them. Its huge red mouth 
was open, but open in song not in a snarl. It passed by them so close that 
they could have touched its mane. They were terribly afraid it would turn 
and look at them, yet in some queer way they wished it would. (9.116–17) 
 
In this passage, both the children and the adults are afraid, but they experience 
this fear differently. The Witch and Uncle Andrew try to run away; the children, 
though frozen with fear, at the same time do not want to run. They even wish 
that the lion wo uld turn his attention to them, demonstrating both the 
tremendum et fascinans of an encounter with the numinous. As the narrator later 
explains, “What you see and hear depends a good deal on where you are 
standing: it also depends on what sort of person yo u are” (10.136). Uncle 
Andrew, because of the “sort of person” he is, does not see the numinous when 
he looks at Aslan; all he sees is a lion who might attack him, and so he tries to 
run away. The children, on the other hand, look at the lion and experienc e a 
similar fear, but also something more than fear.  
Brett Roscoe 
106  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 This strange combination of emotions is aroused by the numen, Otto’s 
term for the source of numinous experience, which in this case is Aslan, who is 
both dreadful and desirable. “People who have not been in Narnia,” the narrator 
explains, “sometimes think that a thing cannot be good and terrible at the same 
time” but that is a mistaken assumption that an experience of Aslan can “cure” 
(LWW 12.126). Aslan is regularly described as both “terrible” and “beautiful”, 
the first term not meaning “bad” but “terrifying” or “dreadful.”11 In fact, Lewis 
frequently uses the word “terrible” in The Chronicles of Narnia  to denote the 
mysterium tremendum  of the numinous, the fear -like emotion evoked by an 
encounter with the spiritual or the divine. And so with a world of images, filled 
with magical beings, talking animals, and a divine lion, Lewis provides his 
readers with imaginative simulations of encounters with God, and these 
simulations evoke the very emotions that young Christians might be told they 
“ought to feel” but cannot feel because they ought to. Stripping the fear of God 
from its “Sund ay school associations,” the books provide affective training, 
arousing fear so that readers can, through the concrete, embodied analogy, 
experience a fear of a different kind. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Aristotle. “Poetics.”  The Critical Tradition: Classic Text and Contemporary Trends, 
shorter 3rd ed., edited by David H. Richter, Bedford / St. Martin’s, 2016, pp. 50–72. 
Barkman, Adam. “Rudolf Otto, The Idea of the Holy.” C.S. Lewis’s List: The Ten Books 
that Influenced Him Most, edited by David Werther and Susan Werther, 
Bloomsbury, 2015, pp. 113–34. 
Bellock, Sian L. and Ian M. Lyons. “Expertise and the Mental Simulation of Action.” 
Handbook of Imagination and Mental Simulation, edited by Keith D. Markman et 
al., Psychology Press, 2012,  pp. 21–34. 
Bolens, Guillemette.  The Style of Gestures: Embodiment and Cognition in Literary 
Narrative. Johns Hopkins UP, 2012. 
Cave, Terence. Thinking with Literature: Toward a Cognitive Criticism. Oxford UP, 2016. 
The ESV Bible. Crossway, 2001, www.esv.org. 
Carnell, Corbin Scott. Bright Shadow of Reality: C.S. Lewis and the Feeling Intellect . 
William B. Eerdmans, 1974. 
Christopher, Joe R. “The Apologist.” C.S. Lewis, edited by Harold Bloom, Chelsea 
House Publishers, 2006, pp. 115–28. 
Como, James. Why I Believe in Narnia: 33 Reviews and Essays on the Life and Work of C.S. 
Lewis. Zossima Press, 2008. 
Downing, David C. Into the Region of Awe: Mysticism in C. S. Lewis. Intervarsity Press, 
2005. 
 
11 See The Horse and His Boy, 11.166, 14.200; LB 15.188. 
Modelling the Fear of God in C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  107 
Duriez, Colin. “In the Library: Composition and Context.” Reading the Classics with 
C.S. Lewis, edited by Thomas L. Martin, Baker Academic, 2000, pp. 349–70. 
Gibbs, Raymond W. Jr. Embodiment and Cognitive Science. Cambridge UP, 2005.  
Grahame, Kenneth. The Wind in the Willows. Edited by Peter Hunt, Oxford UP, 2010.  
Hauk, Olaf, et al. “Somatotopic Representation of Action Words in Human Motor 
and Premotor Cortex.” Neuron, vol. 41, 2004, pp. 301–07. 
Hogan, Patrick Colm. Literature and Emotion. Routledge, 2018. 
Kagan, Jerome. Galen’s Prophecy: Temperament in Human Nature. Basic Books, 1994. 
Ledoux, Joseph. Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and Anxiety . 
Penguin Books, 2015.  
Lewis, C.S. The Collected Letters of C.S. Lewis. Edited by Walter Hooper, 3 vols., 
HarperSanFrancisco, 2004, 2004, and 2007.  
—. “Ex Libris.” The Christian Century, vol. 79, June 1972, p. 719.  
—. The Horse and His Boy. HarperTrophy, 1994.  
—. “Is Theism Important?” God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics , edited by 
Walter Hooper, William B. Eerdmans, 2014, pp. 186–91.  
—. “It All Began with a Picture . . . ” Of Other Worlds: Essays and Stories, HarperOne, 
2017, pp. 67–68.  
—. The Last Battle. HarperTrophy, 1994.  
—. The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe. HarperTrophy, 1994.  
—. The Magician’s Nephew. HarperTrophy, 1994. 
—. “Myth Became Fact.” God in the Dock: Essays on Theology and Ethics , edited by 
Walter Hooper, William B. Eerdmans, 2014, pp. 54–60.  
—. Prince Caspian. HarperTrophy, 1994.  
—. The Problem of Pain. MacMillan Publishing, 1977. 
—. The Silver Chair. HarperTrophy, 1994.  
—. “Sometimes Fairy Stories May Say Best What’s to be Said.” Of Other Worlds: Essays 
and Stories, HarperOne, 2017, pp. 55–59.  
—. The Voyage of the “Dawn Treader.” HarperTrophy, 1994.  
Otto, Rudolf. The Idea of the Holy: An Inquiry into the Non -rational Factor in the Idea of 
the Divine and its Relation to the Rational. Translated by John W. Harvey, 2nd ed., 
Oxford UP, 1952. 
Pulvervmüller, Friedemann, et al. “Functional Links Between Motor and Language 
Systems.” European Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 21, 2005, pp. 793–97. 
 
BRETT ROSCOE is Associate Professor of English at The King’s University in 
Edmonton, Canada, where he teaches courses in general and medieval literature. His 
research interests include medieval wisdom literature, cognitive approaches to 
literature, and intersections of literature and theology. 
 
 

  
 
 

  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  109 
 
 
                  EASTING AT THE THRESHOLD :  
                             EUCHARISTIC EROTICISM AND  
                       HOMONATIONALISM IN DIANE DUANE ’S  
                               THE TALE OF THE FIVE  
 
                                         TAYLOR DRIGGERS  
 
INTRODUCTION 
N HIS ESSAY “ON FAIRY-STORIES” (1947), J.R.R. Tolkien suggests that by re -
arranging and offering variations on elements of the primary world, fantasy 
can reinvigorate our appreciation of everyday things “such as stone, and wood, 
and iron; tree and grass; house and fire; bread and wine” (69). The eucharistic 
applicability suggested by the inclusion of bread and wine in this formulation is 
likely no accident; as a devout Catholic, Tolkien’s theorization of fairy-story, by 
his own acknowledgement, shares a complex relationship with his 
understanding of the Christian story of salvation. Alana M. Vincent goes so far 
as to link fantasy to the Eucharist by way of the Catholic principle of 
sacramentality. While “sacraments, such as the Eucharist […] confer grace 
immediately” (23), within a Christ ian framework literature can be understood 
as sacramental, a facet of everyday life that awakens a sense of the numinous and 
“leaves the soul disposed toward the reception of grace” (24). Fantastic recovery 
in particular carries a sacramental potential to “inspire entirely new dimensions 
of theological understanding” (25) because “the aura of mystery which pervades 
the fantasy world is well situated to illuminate the real world by proxy” (43). 
While fantasy is incapable of serving as a direct stand -in for t he eucharistic 
sacrament per se, a Christian theological reading of fantasy positions it at the 
threshold where the material concerns of everyday life turn towards 
communion with the divine, a communion that remains rooted in fleshly acts 
centered around the fulfilment of bodily needs and desires (eating and drinking) 
even as it gestures toward transcendence. 
Fantasy’s ability to critically reimagine the primary world, and matters 
of the body in the primary world in particular, also enables it to re -vision 
sacramental practices from the margins of gendered and sexual difference, 
uncovering subversive queer alte rnatives to the doctrines that govern them. 1 
After all, if recovery consists in “viewing the Other not as an extension of one’s 
self, but as an entity both outside of and equal to one’s self” (Vincent 47), then 
the sacramental revelation enacted by fantasy can also challenge dominant 
 
1 See Taylor Driggers, Queering Faith in Fantasy Literature. 
I 
Taylor Driggers 
110  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
expressions of theology to commune with, brush up against, and commingle 
with the image of God as embodied by the sexual other often institutionally 
barred from receiving the material and spiritual goods of communion in the first 
place. As a sacramental production, fantasy that takes up this queer theological 
task can dispose theology towards the grace of what Marcella Althaus-Reid has 
described as “God, as a stranger at the gates of Hegemonic Theology, amongst 
loving expressions of relationships at the mar gins of the defined decent and 
proper in Christianity” (The Queer God [Queer] 171).  
Diane Duane’s ongoing fantasy series The Tale of the Five (1979–present) 
explicitly articulates a queer sacramentality, with specific applicability to the 
Eucharist, along these lines. In this essay, I demonstrate how The Tale of the Five 
emphasizes acts of eating and drinking as important components not only of its 
secondary world’s Goddess-based religion, but also of its characters’ pansexual, 
polyamorous relationships. These instances provocatively link religious 
devotion with the pursuit of erotic pleasures and relational formations deemed 
indecent within many primary -world expressions of Christianity. The 
Goddess’s affection for humanity and humanity’s love for the Goddess spill 
over into queer sexual encounters between humans, which in turn are reveale d 
as extensions or permutations of the former, and human characters additionally 
experience personally transformative sexual encounters with the Goddess. Yet 
the series’ adherence to standard conventions of popular fantasy at the time of 
writing, rooted in fantasies of monarchy, race, and nation in a manner that exists 
in uneasy tension with, and raises serious questions about the limits of, its queer 
theological imagination. 
The Tale of the Five is part of a body of fantasy literature explicitly aimed 
at addressing issues of gender and sexuality emerging in the 1970s, 1980s, and 
1990s, alongside works such as Elizabeth A. Lynn’s The Chronicles of Tornor  
(1979–80), Samuel R. Delany’s Nevèrÿon cycle (1979 –87), Ellen Kushner’s 
Riverside novels (1987 –2006), Mercedes Lackey’s The Last Herald -Mage trilogy 
(1989–91), and Laurie J. Marks’s Children of the Triad  series (1989–91). Of these, 
only Duane’s and Kushner’s series are set in worlds in which non-heterosexual 
orientations are the default norm across all areas of society. 2 The Tale of the Five 
is set in a secondary world called the Middle Kingdoms and consists of three 
novels—The Door into Fire (1979), The Door into Shadow (1984), and The Door into 
Sunset (1992)—in addition to the novelette The Levin-Gad (2018) and the novella 
The Landlady (2019), with at least one more spinoff novel, The Librarian, and a 
fourth main series novel, The Door into Starlight, still to be published at the time 
 
2 Marks’s series is a difficult one to categorize, since most of its main characters are intersex 
nonhumans. While nonheterosexual unions between these characters and other species 
exist, the humanoid Walkers are implied to live in a default patriarchal society. 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  111 
of writing.3 Despite the series’ fluid and expansive approach to sexuality, as well 
as its unique cosmogony, it has received virtually no scholarly attention from 
either queer or religious studies-informed scholars of fantasy. The religion of the 
Middle Kingdoms, stru ctured as it is around the tripartite goddess motif of 
“Maiden and Mother and Wise Woman” (Duane, The Door into Fire [Fire] 11) and 
animistic magic rituals associated with the earth, draws some notable influences 
from neo-Pagan beliefs and practices. However, these are also intertwined with 
heterodox, but nonetheless clear, variations on Christian doctrines and 
theological concepts, such as the belief that humans “are made in the Goddess’s 
image” ( The Door into Sunset  [Sunset] 70), the concern with a deity who is 
incarnated in human flesh and exists alongside humanity, and its investment in 
motifs of eating, drinking, and transubstantiation that gesture toward 
eucharistic sacrament.  
In the latter case, the sharing of food and drink becomes a sacramental 
act that draws together, and blurs boundaries between, religious devotion; filial 
and platonic love; erotic desire; sexual pleasure; and bodily transformations, 
expansions, and multipl ications in a manner that prefigures Linn Marie 
Tonstad’s queer reading of the Eucharist and its relationship to the Body of 
Christ. In Tonstad’s formulation, the multiplication of the body of Christ to co -
inhere in bread and wine (and therefore the labor of those who produce them) 
and its subsequent distribution among the bodies of believers creates a complex 
and potent image of loving coinhabitance within the church as the Body of 
Christ that transgresses bodily, identitarian, geographical, and institutio nal 
boundaries without assimilation into an undifferentiated sameness. To analyze 
The Tale of the Five in terms of the Eucharist and the body of Christ is by no means 
to suggest that a Christian reading is the only available one of its religious 
imaginary; in fact, its syncretic blend of Christian and feminist neo -Pagan 
influences makes such a claim impossible. Rather, eucharistic theology is merely 
one area of many —though a significant one —in which the series enters into 
conversation with primary-world religious observation. 
And yet, as much as its worldbuilding and narrative evocatively 
suggest this queer portrait of religious life, The Tale of the Five also betrays it to 
some extent. The fact that a major narrative arc of the series involves restoring 
one of the protagonists, Freelorn, as the rightful hereditary monarch of the 
nation of Arlen, coupled with the mystical import attributed to noble bloodlines 
and titles  throughout, jars awkwardly with and in some instances alters the 
meaning of its otherwise radical eucharistic theology. While these narrative 
 
3 Other works by Diane Duane set in the Middle Kingdoms include the novelettes Parting 
Gifts (1981), Lior and the Sea (1985), and The Span (1999), but as they do not concern any of 
the principal characters of The Tale of the Five, they are beyond the scope of this study. 
Taylor Driggers 
112  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
attributes are far from unique in the broader context of twentieth -century 
fantasy more generally, these aspects of the texts become more disconcerting 
when, beginning with The Door into Shadow, a significant portion of the narrative 
conflict involves protecting the Middle Kingdoms from an othered race that 
threatens their stability. This note of dissonance provokes consideration of the 
need for fantasy’s queer theological imaginaries to take care that they challenge 
rather than merely extend the logic of western Christian triumphalism. 
 
GOING (IN)TO TOWN: SEXUAL, MATERIAL, AND SPIRITUAL GOODS OF THE MIDDLE 
KINGDOMS 
Chapter 6 of The Door into Sunset  opens with an epigraph from a 
fictitious text telling the tale of a woman who roams the earth seeking the 
Goddess, but is unable to find her. Returning home, dejected, to an empty larder, 
she ventures into the Darthis city marketplace, where she encounters 
 
a Woman wearing that Cloak which is the night sky, and with a basket 
over her arm, and bread in it and wine. And the woman looked at the 
Goddess in amazement, and the Goddess sighed and smiled, and said to 
her, “It’s such a nuisance, but sometimes you just have to go into town.” 
And She kissed the woman, and was gone . . .  (Sunset 124) 
 
This scene communicates much about the eucharistic and incarnational theology 
that characterizes the Middle Kingdoms’ cosmogony. Both evoking and 
subverting the biblical account in which the prophet Elijah encounters God not 
in the great wind or the earthquake or the fire, but in “a sound of sheer silence” 
(1 Kings 19:12, NRSVUE), the Goddess is found not in the remote corners of the 
earth but among ordinary women in the bustling marketplace. The eucharistic 
motif of bread and wine appears here both to unde rscore the incarnate nature 
of the Goddess’s existence —since in the eucharistic sacrament bread and wine 
correspond to the body and blood of the incarnate Christ —and to signify the 
material goods that they literally are. As a setting for this exchange, the  market 
is particularly laden with meaning for queer theology. Althaus -Reid’s Marxian 
analysis of traditional theology, for instance, observes that “[e]conomic desires 
walk hand in hand with erotic desires and theological needs” (Indecent Theology 
[Indecent] 166) and that 
 
theology deals with a market of souls and the definition of their needs: 
sacraments, prayers, ritual ordinances and an allegiance to beliefs which 
regulate people’s lives, in order to effectively distribute the spiritual 
goods of redemption or forgiveness or even eternal life amongst them, 
the spiritual clientele. (166–67) 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  113 
As in the Eucharist, material and spiritual goods, here distributed directly by 
the Goddess herself, appear simultaneously in bread and wine at the moment of 
fulfilment for the unnamed woman’s material needs and theological desires. 
And yet, the Goddess’s playful, almost camp remarks to the woman (it is not at 
all difficult to imagine this line being casually tossed off in a drag performance) 
avoid conflating the Goddess with the marketplace itself. The sly suggestion that 
“[i]t’s such a nuisance” to go int o town but that “sometimes you just have to” 
positions the Goddess as immanent within the everyday business of economy 
and its material goods, but lovingly transcending any regulatory system 
structuring it (although, as I demonstrate later, this becomes complicated when 
considering the political structures that govern the Middle Kingdoms as a 
whole). 
The encounter with the Goddess in the marketplace is instructive in 
tracing the links between worship of the Goddess, the shared consumption of 
food and drink, and the exchange of queer sexual pleasures. I argue that The Tale 
of the Five is permeated with instances of transubstantiation and transfiguration 
in which relations and encounters slide freely between these categories or 
inhabit more than one simultaneously. The series is already notable from a queer 
standpoint thanks to the open and dynamic nature of its sexual landscape. While 
inhabitants of the Middle Kingdoms are subject to a divine obligation to have at 
least one child in their lifetime —similar to, yet distinct from, the injunction to 
“[b]e fruitful and multiply” in the biblical creation narrat ive (Gen . 1:28, 
NRSVUE)—their sexual lives otherwise are open and varied, with most 
characters taking on multiple partners of all genders. The central pairing in the 
series initially appears to be a gay romance between two of the central 
protagonists, Herewiss and Freelorn, but these characters’ romantic and sexual 
lives branch out over the course of the texts to encompass multiple relationships 
of varying types and durations with characters of multiple genders. These 
entanglements also continually reshape the dynamic between these two men 
even as they remain committed to one another. Already we can see here a fluid 
and shifting sexual landscape that markedly contrasts with what Althaus -Reid 
analyses as the regulatory frame of sexual “decency” that dictates who is worthy 
of receiving material and spiritual goods within Christian institutions ( Indecent 
167–68). 
Yet even beyond this, The Tale of the Five ’s world and narrative are 
marked by constant bodily transgressions and surprises: a human and dragon 
can occupy the same body and become lovers, human subjectivities can expand 
to inhabit the tectonic plates beneath a mountain range, and a one -night stand 
can bring one face-to-face with the divine. At the time when the series’ narrative 
takes place, the world is at a critical juncture in the constant struggle between 
the Goddess who creates and loves, and Her falle n offspring the Shadow who 
Taylor Driggers 
114  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
devours and destroys, and as such, the rules and norms that govern the world 
are shifting even further. Herewiss is the first man in centuries to wield the 
mystical power of the Blue Fire usually reserved for women, and one of his 
sexual partners is a fire  elemental named Sunspark, for whom sexuality and 
romantic love should be impossible and whose physical appearance shifts 
fluidly between human and nonhuman forms as well as between genders. 
Throughout the series, human bodies and subjectivities expand, ch ange shape, 
and multiply through various magical and divine means to exceed and 
destabilize the bounds of self-identity. Always weaving Her way through these 
experiences of queer excess and impossibility is the Goddess, who plays an 
active role in the sexual lives of all Her creations.  
 
A WONDERFUL EXCHANGE: EUCHARISTIC EROTICISM 
The Door into Fire  establishes that “[o]nce in a lifetime, a person will 
know the joy of being held in the Goddess’s arms,” although “She comes as just 
another person, with human quirks and wrinkles; sometimes She comes in the 
form of someone you know—perhaps even your own loved” (Fire 45–46). Later 
in that novel, Herewiss, Freelorn, the sorceress Segnbora, and the rest of their 
travelling companions happen upon an inn in the wilderness, where the woman 
who keeps the inn agrees to let them stay the night in  exchange for sex in place 
of money, an apparently commonplace occurrence within the Middle 
Kingdoms’ sexual economy. After sitting down to a sumptuous meal, the 
companions depart to their respective rooms, with Segnbora chosen to go to bed 
with the innkeeper per their agreement. However, the innkeeper surprises each 
of the others in turn by appearing to all of them simultaneously at Moonrise, 
where they each eventually recognize her as the Goddess, and she spends the 
night with them. 
As in the encounter with the Goddess in the marketplace, here the 
Goddess first appears in the midst of everyday exchanges before exceeding 
them in the abundance of the material, sexual, and spiritual gratification She 
bears. The initial sexual arrangement  She negotiates with Segnbora as the 
innkeeper becomes multiplied sevenfold among the company and leaves them 
fulfilled far beyond any normal sexual encounter. Reminiscing about the 
experience afterward, Segnbora contrasts it with ordinary sex in which, “give as 
you will, there’s only so much that can be shared in one evening, or one day, 
before the body gives out, gets sore, gets tired,” whereas the Goddess’s 
attentions satisfied “all of me, all the depths, the corners, the little fantasies I 
never dared” (Fire 160). The bounty of the Goddess’s table at the inn and the rest 
and shelter She provides for the travelers gives way to a fulfilment of sexual 
needs beyond the usual bounds of possibility within human relations, which in 
turn leaves the company spiritually enriched and edified for their journey. 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  115 
The bountiful multiplication and loving commingling of divine and 
human bodies in this exchange, and its mediation through the hospitality of the 
meal table, bears a strong resemblance to Tonstad’s queering of the eucharistic 
feast. Rather than the straigh tforward transmutation that characterizes 
traditional readings of transubstantiation, Tonstad proposes an additive model 
that she refers to as “impanation” to make sense of the presence of the body of 
Christ within the Eucharist (240). In this model, “the Word assumes a bread 
nature in addition to a human nature” that is freely distributed among, and 
comes to dwell within the bodies of, all who take part in the feast (240). This 
additive understanding of the Eucharist challenges us to see the distribution o f 
spiritual goods as intimately bound up with the free sharing of material goods, 
since “the multiplication of the breaded Christs means enough Christ for all” 
(242), and signals the form of good relations that the grace of Christ initiates 
among humanity. As Tonstad puts it, 
 
our participation in (taking part in) Christ brings us together in face -to-
face relations that show us to each other more clearly —or at least have 
the potential to do so, for better and worse. The sufficiency of the 
eucharist, and the intensified relations hips among humans that it 
symbolizes and makes possible, suggests reconfiguration of the 
conditions of bodied, material existence themselves. (242) 
 
Christian theology tends not to explicitly imagine God as pursuing sexual 
relationships with humanity in the same way that the Goddess does in The Tale 
of the Five , and certainly Tonstad’s reading of the Eucharist makes no literal 
claims to this effect either. Yet Tonstad, following Althaus -Reid, is heavily 
invested in showing how Christianity’s theological metaphors and practices are 
always already sexual in nature ; their inherent sexuality simply tends to be 
invisible within a society that accepts patriar chal and heterosexual views of 
reality as natural. The Eucharist is no exception. Althaus -Reid, for instance, 
identifies that in the Catholicism of her youth, the traditional pose in which one 
receives the Eucharist involves kneeling at the altar, which pl aces the 
communicant in proximity to the priest’s penis ( Queer 11). A whole matrix of 
power relations is thus implied by this gesture, linking the Catholic Church’s 
enforcement of patriarchal and heterosexual gender relations to the 
innumerable instances of sexual abuse within the Church that have come to light 
in the past few decades, as well as the Church’s historical role in colonial 
exercises of domination and conquest. As Althaus -Reid puts it, “hierarchical 
church models [are] constructed from the axis of priests’ penises” (12). Similarly, 
at stake for Tonstad is finding an alternative to patriarchal redemption models 
in which the church is positioned as the submissive bride to Christ the 
penetrative bridegroom. The prevailing image in her eucharistic t heology is 
Taylor Driggers 
116  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
instead one of loving coinhabitance, where “[t]he body’s limits do not disappear, 
but spatial location becomes coinhabitable, and the colocality of different 
bodies—presence in the same place at the same time —transforms the nature of 
relationality and community” (239). Impanation thus envisions a form of loving 
relation in which communicants commingle with God and one another without 
assimilation or loss of particularity. 
The additive logic of impanation materializes in Duane’s series in the 
way the Goddess multiplies herself to initiate pleasurable relations with the 
human characters; in the way that these encounters in turn intensify the close 
bonds that the protagonists share while preserving the distinctions between 
them; and in the way that food and drink serve as reminders of this love and 
intimacy. The Door into Sunset expands on this notion in its conclusion  with a 
seven-way wedding between Herewiss, Freelorn, Segnbo ra, the fire elemental 
Sunspark, the resurrected dragon Hasai, Queen Eftgan of Darthen, and her 
husband Wyn, in which they all vow “to do right by one another, as the Goddess 
would were She marrying in (which of course She was)” before partaking of 
sacral wine (Sunset 377). While this latter instance is the only depiction in the 
series of an official religious sacrament in which the act of drinking signifies a 
good relation with the Goddess as among and within the loving relationships of 
Her creation, insta nces of eating and drinking elsewhere in the series serve as 
articulations of this relationship that exist on the sacramental threshold between 
everyday life and religious observance. 
 
LOVERS AND THE LOVING-CUP: THRESHOLD THEOLOGY 
Herewiss’s own encounter with the Goddess at the inn is mediated by 
a shared cup of Brightwood white, a wine significant to Herewiss’s homeland. 
Later, under the influence of the Soulflight drug that the Goddess gives him to 
help unlock his Fire, Herewiss perceives within the wine 
 
the cries of ecstatic agony uttered by the vines as their burden was ripped 
from them, and […] the silver touch of rain. He caught the langorous 
thoughts of one of the young girls who had helped to press out the 
vintage, and he felt how it had been for her , the night before, under the 
pomegranate trees with her lover. […] The tangled, vivid selfhoods of 
bees and vintners and young girls flowed down his throat like cinnamon 
fire, and left an aftertaste like a summer dawn. (Fire 252) 
 
For Herewiss, the simple act of drinking a cup of Brightwood white is revealed 
to be a sacramental act in which he comes into profound contact with other lives, 
including nonhuman ones. This revelation embodies what Tolkien identifies as 
the sacramental role of recovery in fantasy, insofar as it involves “seeing things 
[…] as things apart from ourselves” (67). Though it occurs via fantastical means, 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  117 
the realization is ultimately a mundane one regarding the interconnectedness of 
all life. The sacredness of wine even in everyday contexts is further underscored 
by the events of The Levin -Gad, in which Liri, the bouncer at a tavern, saves 
Herewiss from the Shadow by smashing a bottle of wine, which, “flaming like 
sunlight made molten, splashed and sprayed everywhere. […] In the flare of 
liquid light the darkness’s limbs flailed out and it went  down like so many 
dropped rocks, sprawling crooked and limp on the slaty floor” (7.38). 
Drinking wine, via the ceremonial object of the lovers’ -cup, is also the 
means by which lovers in the Middle Kingdoms pay homage to their love for 
each other and the Goddess made manifest in and through that love. In The Door 
into Fire, the cup’s role in daily life is established as follows: 
 
It was the Goddess’s cup, the cup poured for Her at each meal to remind 
those who ate that all set before them was, one way or another, the 
product of Her love—as were the people with whom they ate. When the 
meal was done, if there were lovers there, the y oungest of them would 
drain the cup together in Her name. If one was alone, one said the 
Blessing for the Sundered and drank it in his own name and the name of 
his lover, wherever that one might be. (Fire 216) 
 
The lovers’-cup features in most scenes featuring Herewiss and Freelorn and, 
eventually, their five other spouses, serving as a reminder to the reader as well 
as the characters themselves of the Goddess’s presence within and mediation 
through the love betw een them. In both name and function, it invites 
comparison to the loving-cup used at love-feasts within the Methodist Christian 
tradition. Both theologically coextensive with and liturgically distinct from the 
official sacrament of the eucharistic feast, t he love -feast can be read as an 
example of what Rachel Muers and Rhiannon Grant have termed “threshold 
practices”: that is, “practices that are, theoretically and institutionally, neither 
church nor non-church” (47). The use of “threshold” here implies the liminality 
of such practices —the point at which worship crosses over into the work of 
everyday life, and vice-versa—but also, and importantly for an account of quasi-
eucharistic practices, etymologically evokes the threshing -floor, a space where 
the theol ogical values of a community are “threshed out” like wheat and 
constituted via everyday encounters (47). 
Instituted by Methodism’s founders, Charles and John Wesley, in the 
eighteenth century, love -feasts were thought at the time to be a revival of the 
early church practice of the Agape, which Frank Baker characterizes as “a 
common meal symbolizing the union of Christians with their Lord and with 
each other” (62). Central to the Methodist reimagining of this practice was the 
loving-cup, “a two-handled mug passed round from hand to hand” from which 
participants share a drink of what initially would have been wi ne, and later, as 
Taylor Driggers 
118  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
the practice has evolved, water or tea (Baker 15). Although the love -feast is not 
a substitute for the Eucharist, it shares many of its theological concerns: from the 
standpoint of bodily theology, the passing of the loving -cup provokes a 
meditation on wha t it means to share in the Body of Christ as made up of a 
gathering of bodies that exist in relation to each other. As a quasi-liturgical object 
designed for the sharing of drink, the loving-cup mediates profoundly intimate 
physical contact that crosses bodily boundaries between participants as it passes 
between lips, signifying participants’ unity in partaking of the meal while 
maintaining the difference that enables their loving interrelation. 
In transforming the loving -cup into the lovers’ -cup, Duane explicitly 
eroticizes this quasi -liturgical object and by extension names desire, in all its 
unpredictability and all its forms, both as a central part of religious observance 
and as a crucial site  at which characters in the series turn from theological 
reflection to engagement with each other in the world. 4 Sitting athwart the line 
between religious observance and everyday life, the cup is a ritual means of 
acknowledging the presence of the Goddess in the hospitality of the meal table, 
the community and common labor of all those present, and the intimacy of those 
joined in erotic and romantic love. It also represents, for the romantically 
unattached, a messianic hope for the Goddess’s love expressed as erotic longing, 
as they “call on the Loved Who Will Be to await [their] coming” (Fire 216) when 
they drink of the cup. Here, not only are queer desire and sexualities named as 
revelatory incarnations of the Goddess’s love, but hospitality itself is reframed 
as a complex and multi-directional flow of love, desire, and care-oriented labor. 
Importantly, the lovers’ -cup’s status as a threshold object, both liturgical and 
mundane in function, would seem to imply that the eucharistic theology of The 
Tale of the Five  is liberated from the forces that normally regulate the flow of 
spiritual, material, and sexual goods in the primary world. 
 
ROYAL BINDINGS: THEOLOGICAL HOMONATIONALISM 
The queer utopianism and radical eucharistic theology potently 
suggested by The Tale of the Five ’s worldbuilding make for strange bedfellows 
with its narrative, which is in large part concerned with restoring Freelorn to his 
hereditary position as King of Arlen. Nearly every principal character in the 
series claims noble lineage to an extent that jar s with the non -hierarchical 
communion suggested by the series’ eucharistic motifs; most egregiously, the 
entire plot of The Landlady concerns Segnbora’s quest to restore her family name 
 
4 As Baker’s historical account of the love -feast relates, the potentially erotic dimensions 
suggested by the feast’s name and the intimate gesture of passing the loving -cup did not 
escape the notice of Methodism’s early detractors, and accusations of sexua l excess were 
common in anti-Methodist propaganda (32–33). 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  119 
and maintain her land holdings. The restoration of a rightful monarch, marking 
a reign of peace and a happy conclusion to the narrative, is a common feature 
within post-Tolkien fantasy literature of the twentieth century, taking its cues 
both from the crow ning of Aragorn in The Lord of the Rings  and the more 
generalized feudal setting of much fantasy written in this vein. Queer and 
feminist fantasy fiction of the time had varied approaches to the question of 
monarchy. Lackey’s Herald-Mage trilogy centers on  a gay man living in a 
heteronormative patriarchy, but, like Duane’s series, takes its monarchical 
setting at face value, with the world of Valdemar ruled by a benevolent king. 
Even the resolutely anarchist Ursula K. Le Guin concludes The Farthest Shore  
(1972), the third volume in her Earthsea series, with the good king Lebannen’s 
coronation, although its sequel Tehanu (1990), published two years prior to The 
Door into Sunset, casts significant doubt on whether this has any bearing on the 
lives of everyday people, especially women, in Earthsea. (Le Guin would later 
remark that “too many modern fantasies are intolerably trivial and complacent 
in their half-baked feudalism” [316]). Delany’s Nevèrÿon cycle and Marks’s Triad 
novels are notable outliers, with the former rigorously interrogating its Robert 
E. Howard -esque setting with realpolitik and a frank treatment of 
homosexuality and sex work, and the latter set in a world that is politically very 
far removed from any primary-world historical analogue. Meanwhile, Elizabeth 
A. Lynn’s Watchtower (1979), published the same year as The Door into Fire, slyly 
subverts its own narrative of feudal conflict as part of its critical contention with 
heteropatriarchal violence; here, the ostensible rightful heir refuses the throne 
and departs to live in the anarchic commune of Vanima, with radical social 
change also to come in the realm of Tornor. To interrogate the collusion between 
religion and monarchy in The Tale of the Five is therefore not to single the series 
out rela tive to the rest of the genre, but rather to examine its performative 
function—in other words, what it means and does —as part of a theological 
imaginary. 
Leaving aside the incoherence of a world as sexually open as the 
Middle Kingdoms —where lineage, inheritance, and familial structure should 
therefore be far messier matters than depicted —being ruled by hereditary 
monarchies and preoccupied with noble lineag es, it is especially strange that 
this system of governance appears to be divinely sanctioned. Not only is 
Freelorn personally invested in winning back the throne from his usurping half-
brother, Cillmod; his ascent is crucial for maintaining the magical Ro yal 
Bindings forged from the alliance between Darthen and Arlen that keep the 
Shadow at bay. In The Door into Shadow, the stakes of installing Freelorn as King 
become apparent when the Bindings come under direct threat; the text makes 
clear that “[t]he end of the Royal Bindings was unthinkable. Such a calamity 
would turn the Shadow loose in the Kingdoms as It hadn’t bee n loose in 
Taylor Driggers 
120  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
centuries” (The Door into Shadow  [Shadow] 147). The Goddess’s struggle is thus 
yoked to Freelorn’s quest for the throne. An Arlene commoner remarks to 
Freelorn, travelling through the Arlene countryside in disguise, that “the young 
king is an instrument of the Goddess, a tool of Hers,” and that “[s]uch a one’s to 
be pitied, poor thing” ( Sunset 163). Similarly, when advising Freelorn on the 
responsibilities of rule, Eftgan declares that “even if I do die, the Goddess who 
gave me this responsibility will hold  me responsible still” (88). That hereditary 
monarchs are positioned by the narrative as specially ordained instruments of 
the Goddess’s will, and that moreover they are to be pitied for this 
responsibility, is an odd recapitulation of the divine right of kings, and a rather 
galling reframing of the real power monarchs wield. Where the eucharistic 
threshold practices commonplace in the Middle Kingdoms hint at a dissolution 
of institutional forces that regulate the distribution of spiritual, material, and 
sexual goods, monarchy rears its head as yet another regulating body in the 
market of souls. 
It would be tempting to read this facet of the series as merely in conflict 
with its otherwise egalitarian queer worldbuilding and theological imagination. 
Yet I contend that when The Tale of the Five’s fascination with monarchic rule is 
examined alongside its eucharistic imaginary via Jasbir K. Puar’s critique of 
homonationalism, a different and more complicated picture emerges. As 
theorized by Puar, homonationalism is the process by which “[a]spects of 
homosexuality have come within the purview of normati ve patriotism, 
incorporating aspects of queer subjectivity into the body of the normalized 
nation” (46), often to legitimize military and imperial incursions into non -
western territories by western states. We can see this process literalized in the 
way that the queer eucharistic motif of impanation extends to the ritual involved 
in maintaining the Royal Bindings. As Freelorn and Eftgan spill their blood upon 
the earth and declare themselves embodiments of the lands of Arlen and 
Darthen, respectively, Segnbora hears their chanting as “the Goddess speaking 
to Herself: one Lover speaking to the Other, in solemn celebration of Their 
eternal relationship” ( Shadow 304). Here, Freelorn and Eftgan’s  blood also 
becomes the land while they in turn also become the Goddess speaking back to 
the land and to Herself, the commingling of bodies that accompanies 
communion with Her here extending to the national body. This motif continues 
in The Door into Sunset  when Freelorn increasingly perceives a mystical 
connection between himself and the landscape of Arlen, leading to an 
understanding of kingship as “[t]he sense that your fleshly body and that earthy 
body were the same, and that earthy body and the Goddess ’s were the same: 
that you were Her lover […] and the land’s lover too” ( Sunset 177–78). What 
seems to materialize here is a form of erotic religious nationalism, where erotic 
desire and religious devotion translate into erotic fidelity to the nation-state. 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  121 
  This sense of religious homonationalism becomes more disquieting 
when it is directed against the othered race of the Ladha, who are more 
commonly referred to as “Reavers” throughout the series. The Ladha are first 
properly introduced in The Door into Shadow as a faceless horde enlisted by the 
Shadow to pillage the lands of the Middle Kingdoms. They are a curious 
construction of the text in that, while they do not map cleanly onto Ebony 
Elizabeth Thomas’s theorization of the “Dark Other,” the racialized mo nster 
inhabiting the margins of western fantasy (19), they share some points of 
commonality. Descriptions of them tend to foreground their difference and their 
seeming primitivism; they are a nomadic, tribal people whose “language was 
utterly different fro m any spoken in the Kingdoms” ( Shadow 132), and who 
“wore no trews or breeches, but [a] strange long undivided shin -length 
garment,” wielding “crude curved swords in rude sheaths” (86). These would 
seem to hearken to a racialized evocation of non-western cultures in contrast to 
the Middle Kingdoms’ medieval European -inflected one, similar to the 
depictions of barbarian cultures that Helen Young critiques in Robert E. 
Howard’s Conan series (see Young 26 –28), yet The Door into Sunset 
conspicuously takes pains to describe their “fair hair” ( Sunset 87) and “pale” 
faces (90).5 They are objects of fear and loathing, initially appearing as a threat 
to the stability of the Middle Kingdoms’ queer utopia; we are told that 
“[h]istorically, there had never been much use in talking to Reavers” and that 
their constant raids on the farms  and wheat fields of the Kingdoms mean that 
“[i]t was rare to know anyone from the south […] who did not hate them with 
the same resigned and impersonal hatred one usually resigned for plague or 
root-wilt” (86–87).  
Following the racial counter -reading strategy proposed by Thomas, 
“[reading] literary and cultural texts from the perspective of the monster” (22), 
we may ask how the Reavers figure into the sacred banquet of the Goddess, 
whether the goods She proffers als o extend to these strangers at the gates and 
whether the secondary world of the texts can in turn recognize the Goddess’s 
grace within and among them fully, and not just fleetingly. The series’ move to 
rehabilitate these characters beginning in The Door in to Sunset prolongs rather 
than resolves these questions. A diplomatic meeting with a Ladha chieftain 
 
5 On this point, however, it bears mentioning that, as Young states, “[w]hiteness […] is not 
just the state of bodily being dependent on phenotypical features, but also encompasses 
culture” (10). Likewise, Puar conceives of racialization “as a figure for sp ecific social 
formations and processes that are not necessarily or only tied to what has been historically 
theorized as ‘race’” (xii). Thus, the Ladha can still be read as racialized figures even as 
their phenotypical descriptions would seem to distance th em from Thomas’s conception 
of Dark Otherness. 
Taylor Driggers 
122  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
reveals to Freelorn that the Ladha raids were due to hunger; he demands of 
Freelorn, 
 
what gives you right to keep all the good for yourselves, to shut us out 
for ever? Our beasts have little, our children die; here the grass is green 
and the sun is warm, so why must we die and you live? (Sunset 92) 
 
That the Ladha are kept in poverty and starvation while, in the rest of the series, 
expressions of the Goddess’s love abound with images of consumption in 
abundance and plenty is conspicuous. While this encounter does result in 
Freelorn granting the Ladha a more fertile plot of land within Arlen’s borders to 
settle, this is done only in exchange for their tacit support of his bid for the 
Arlene crown. The text does not linger on this exchange much further, and when 
it does come up, it is in terms that prese rve the presumed innocence of the 
Kingdoms, their rulers, and their inhabitants. When a party of Ladha turn up to 
the royal wedding at the novel’s conclusion, Freelorn chalks up their past 
cultural and racial animosities to the fact that “we didn’t know any better” (378).  
Such a pat dismissal of past injustices, coupled with the fact that this 
new arrangement positions Arlen as the paternalistic benefactor instructing the 
primitive Ladha in proper agricultural techniques, preserves hierarchies of 
power between the two cultu res. In this way it echoes the self -congratulatory 
message of inclusion that Tonstad identifies within many nonhomophobic 
liberal Christian institutions, one that does not humble itself before the grace of 
God as the stranger at the gates but instead seeks  “to be left as the good in our 
(own) goodness, as those mediating the goods we already enjoy to those we 
identify as others” (270). With The Librarian promising to center around Freelorn 
embarking on a quest with a Ladha ally, the full story of the Middle Kingdoms’ 
relationship with the Ladha is yet to be told. Yet the one that already exists tells 
of a queer theological community unwilling or unable to part with a sense of its 
own supremacy and privileged access to the divine, or with the national bodies 
that regulate that access. 
 
CONCLUSIONS 
In speaking to the queer potentiality latent within all fantasy, Jes Battis 
acknowledges that fantasy “can also merely recapitulate homophobic and 
patriarchal tenets” (261). Yet grappling with queer fantasy’s capacity to 
reproduce homonationalist conceptions of queerness forces us to contend with 
the further possibility that any given text —much like any given queerness —
may contain a mixture of radical and reactionary elements that demand to be 
read in the context of each other. The Tale of the Five  articulates a eucharistic 
theology that radically re -maps the relationship between the goods of queer 
Feasting at the Threshold: Eucharistic Eroticism and Homonationalism in Duane 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  123 
sexual pleasure, divine communion, and the sharing of food and drink. In this 
imaginary, divine, human, and nonhuman bodies coincide with each other in a 
loving coinhabitance at the threshold of religious observance and everyday life 
that leaves all fulfil led beyond imagining. Yet the fluidity of bodily and 
identitarian borders suggested by this figuration fails to translate into a 
dissolution of national, cultural, and racial ones. Instead, both social status and 
national superiority are essentialized via, ironically, the same fantastical devices 
through which the series’ queer religious imaginary is conceived. Read from the 
perspective of queer Christian theology, this homonationalist fantasy suggests 
the danger of queer expressions of Christianity that do  not sufficiently unsettle 
the self-identity of the church and the histories of white Christian supremacy, 
colonialism, empire, and class oppression with which both the church and 
theological conceptions of gender and sexuality are unavoidably bound up.  
By contrast, Tonstad argues for a queer theology in which “[t]he 
failure, rather than the success, of the church is the means of its symbolic 
pointing toward the body of Christ that lies outside the walls in whomever the 
church understands at its others” (271). That the theology of the Middle 
Kingdoms occupies a space of bodily chaos that can break primary-world codes 
of gender, desire, and identity, but not those of monarchy and nation, indicates 
that fantasy’s queer theological potential exists in fraught relation to what 
Young has identified as the “habits of Whiteness” and troubled histories  of 
racialization in the genre (Young 10). With this in mind, queer theologians may 
approach fantasy both as an object of critique and as the grounds on which to 
continue to seek to tell a different story about Christianity: one in which the 
distribution of the goods of the body of Christ is not the sole domain of kings 
and nobles; in which the church bears witness to its failure and humbles itself in 
the face of its others; in which stewardship of the goods of creation is articulated 
in terms other than blood and soil. 
 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Althaus-Reid, Marcella. Indecent Theology: Theological Perversions in Sex, Gender, and 
Politics. Routledge, 2000.  
—. The Queer God. Routledge, 2003.  
Baker, Frank. Methodism and the Love-Feast. Epworth Press, 1957.  
Battis, Jes. “Queer Spellings: Magic and Melancholy in Fantasy -Fiction.” Simon 
Fraser University, PhD Dissertation, https://summit.sfu.ca/item/8288. 
Driggers, Taylor. Queering Faith in Fantasy Literature: Fantastic Incarnations and the 
Deconstruction of Theology. Bloomsbury, 2022. 
Duane, Diane. The Door into Fire. Tor, 1985.  
—. The Door into Shadow. Corgi, 1991.  
—. The Door into Sunset. Tor, 1992.  
Taylor Driggers 
124  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
—. The Levin-Gad. E-book ed., Lionhall Press, 2018.  
—. The Landlady. E-book ed., Lionhall Press, 2019. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. “The Critics, the Monsters, and the Fantasists.” Dreams Must 
Explain Themselves: The Selected Non-Fiction of Ursula K. Le Guin. Gollancz, 2018, 
pp. 309–319. 
Muers, Rachel and Rhiannon Grant. “Theology at Thresholds: Learning from a 
Practice ‘In Transition.’” Ecclesial Practices, vol. 4, 2017, pp. 45–62. 
Puar, Jasbir K. Terrorist Assemblages: Homonationalism in Queer Times. Duke UP, 2007.  
Thomas, Ebony Elizabeth. The Dark Fantastic: Race and the Imagination from Harry 
Potter to The Hunger Games. New York UP, 2019.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. “On Fairy -stories.” Tolkien On Fairy -stories, edited by Verlyn Flieger 
and Douglas A. Anderson, HarperCollins, 2014, pp. 27–84.  
Tonstad, Linn Marie. God and Difference: The Trinity, Sexuality, and the Transformation 
of Finitude. Routledge, 2016.  
Vincent, Alana M. Culture, Communion and Recovery: Tolkienian Fairy -story and Inter-
Religious Exchange. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2012. 
Young, Helen. Race and Popular Fantasy: Habits of Whiteness. Routledge, 2016.  
 
 
TAYLOR DRIGGERS holds a PhD in English Literature from the University of 
Glasgow. He is an independent scholar currently researching how fantasy characters 
model reading and archiving practices that can inform queer history -making and 
kinship-building in our world. Taylor  is the recipient of a 2024 Le Guin Feminist 
Science Fiction Fellowship, and his debut monograph, Queering Faith in Fantasy 
Literature (Bloomsbury Academic, 2022), was a finalist for the 2023 Mythopoeic 
Scholarship Award in Myth and Fantasy Studies. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  125 
 
 
                     ANDEMIC MYTHMAKING :  
                           COVID -19  AND MYTHOLOGICAL  
                           SYMBOLISM IN INDIAN FOLK ART
 
                                 ISHANI ANWESHA JOSHI AND  
                                  SATHYARAJ VENKATESAN  
 
INTRODUCTION 
HE USE OF MYTHOLOGY IN ART DATES BACK  to ancient civilizations, where 
myths served as cultural reservoirs that preserved collective beliefs, values, 
and archetypes. In the context of COVID -19, artists have drawn upon these 
mythological traditions and archetypes to tackle multifaceted issues arising 
from the pandemic. Ancient myths that resonate with contemporary 
circumstances and express societal anxie ties and resilience during the COVID -
19 pandemic contribute “to the collective grand narrative on contagion”  
(Venkatesan). The archetypes embedd ed in mythologies offer a universal 
language that transcends specific cultural contexts, which allows artists to evoke 
deep-seated—and often subconscious —connections with their audience. By 
employing universal themes in mythological stories, artists tap in to the 
collective unconscious to craft narratives that speak to the common humanity 
within us all.  
 Incorporating folk art traditions, with their deeply rooted cultural 
symbols and narratives, within the corpus of COVID art enriches the visual 
language of the pandemic by lending the themes a renewed depth and 
significance while also placing such artistic creations on a broader civilizational 
canvas. COVID folk art forms a part of the larger corpus of ResiliArt, a term 
borrowed from a “UNESCO initiative of the same name which addresses the 
concerns of artists and arts organizations impacted by the pandemic” (The Marg 
Foundation). Through a comprehensive analysis of Durga Bai Vyam’s “ Samura 
Manthan” and Rupsona and Bahadur Chitrakar’s “ Corona Rakshasa,” this article 
aims to investigate how Indian mythological stories in folk art have fused with 
pandemic-related themes to create to a new visual register during COVID -19 
pandemic. By analyzing the interplay of mythological motifs and contemporary 
themes, the article attempts to unravel the levels of meaning, symbolism, and 
emotion that these artists have introduced in their works. 
Simultaneously, by infusing folk art with modern themes, folk artists 
have created a vernacular modernism by blending the traditional and the 
modern, hence, reflecting distinctive regional identities while engaging with 
global modernity. A term borrowed fr om an edited volume on architecture 
T 
Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan 
126  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
titled “Vernacular Modernism: Heimat, Globalization, and the Built 
Environment,” vernacular modernism advocates that modern architecture, 
instead of eradicating local traditions and styles, integrates them into its design 
and creates a unique amalgamation of the regional and the global (Umbach and 
Hüppauf). The essence of such a juxtaposition is seen in various disciplines, and 
in the context of this article, in folk art such as Vyam’s “Samudra Manthan” (2021) 
and Rupsona and Bahadur Chitrakar’s “ Corona Rakshasa” (2021). Incorporating 
folk art traditions, with their deeply rooted cultural symbols and narratives, 
within the corpus of COVID art enriches the visual language of the pandemic, 
lending the themes a renewed sense of depth and significance. In doing so, 
contemporary events acquire fresh forms of expression, while folk art is 
revitalized, becoming more relevant and attuned to the present. 
 
INDIAN FOLK ART DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
Folk art refers to visual arts made in the context of folk culture, which 
refers to “products and practices of relatively homogeneous and isolated small-
scale social groups living in rural locations” often associated with “tradition, 
historical continuity, sense of place, and belonging” (Revill). By this definition, 
folk art encompasses a wide range of creative expressions, including folk 
painting, sculpture, music, dance, and more. Unlike traditional painting and 
academic art, typically taught in formal ar t schools and dedicated university 
departments worldwide, folk art is primarily learned through apprenticeships 
with local folk artists, who may or may not hold a mainstream art degree. 
Rooted in tradition, historical continuity, sense of place, and cultur al practices 
of communities, folk art is often passed down through generations and reflect 
the values and identities of the people practicing it. Employing natural materials 
such as wood, straw, clay, and others, folk art utilizes traditional art forms and  
motifs to depict stories and characters ranging from mythological gods and 
heroes to nature, and in recent times, even the modern lifestyle.  
India has several folk art traditions, especially folk painting traditions, 
that are unique to specific regions of the country. For instance, Madhubani 
paintings (also known as Mithila paintings), named after the eponymous village 
in Bihar and traditionally used to decorate walls, floors, and furniture, is 
characterized by bright colors, horizontal and vertical sectioning, geometric 
patterns, little to no blank space, two-dimensional images, and stylized (at times 
distorted and abstract) figures. In contrast, Warli painting, originating from the 
Warli tribe, an Adivasi (tribal) community in Maharashtra, uses simple geometric 
shapes, stick figures, and a limited color palette (generally b lack and white) to 
depict day -to-day life and nature. Cheria Scroll painting, a stylized form of 
Nakashi art from Telangana, was used by wandering storytellers to 
predominantly narrate stories from mythology and folk culture. Similarly, Phad 
Pandemic Mythmaking: COVID-19 and Mythological Symbolism in Indian Folk Art 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  127 
painting from Rajasthan consists of large-scale artworks, typically ranging from 
twenty to thirty feet, painted on handwoven, coarse cotton cloth. These 
paintings feature figures with prominent, almond -shaped eyes facing each 
other, rendered in a flat, sty lized manner, and are framed by intricate borders, 
often depicting mythological narratives or stories of local deities. Other notable 
folk painting traditions in India include Sanjhi art  (Uttarakhand), Tanjore 
painting (Tamil Nadu), and Bhil painting (Madh ya Pradesh). Many of these 
folk-art traditions, like the Warli and Cheria Scroll, have been recognized as a 
region-specific cultural treasure through the Geographical Indication (GI) tag. 
In India, where much of the rural and tribal social structure is steeped 
in practices passed down through generations via folk wisdom, folk art assumes 
a pivotal role in disseminating information about COVID -19 and shaping 
desired behavioral responses. Fro m “building social awareness to humorous 
interpretations,” artists from nearly every major folk tradition in India “have 
come up with their own view of the pandemic and its protocols” 
(Gangopadhyay). For instance, combining the aesthetics of Warli paintings with 
the theme of COVID -19, Amit Dhombare painted Corona ek Vishva Mahamari  
(Corona, a global pandemic), Ramesh Hegadi painted Save the World from 
Corona, Anil Chaitya Vangad created Life in Covid-19, and Sanjay Parhad painted 
Corona 2020 . Om Prakash Dhurve’s Total Lockdown  and Choti Tekam’s Social 
Distancing in Covid in the Gond (a prominent tribal community) art tradition are 
a few other COVID -related folk paintings. Furthermore, D. Vinay Nakas used 
the Cheria Scroll folk art style to illustrate Stories of Covid-19. Prakash Joshi, in his 
Phad painting Humanity to Community , illustrates masked people maintaining 
social distancing and going about daily activities, such as buying groceries, 
feeding livestock, and receiving COVID aid while wild animals such as deer 
roam freely in the forest in the absence of human beings. Simil arly, Madhubani 
artist Pushpa Kumari’s Covid Bride illustrates a bride getting married even as an 
airplane zips “across the paper, representing people travelling and transmitting 
the virus, and a series of trains” ferry “migrant workers home, at the bottom of 
the work” (Bhuyan). 
Apindra Swain, from Odisha’s famous artists’ village Raghurajpur, 
drew Pattachitra paintings, such as the Covid Code of Conduct . Unlike their 
counterparts in Odisha, Pattachitra artists in West Bengal (called Patuas) such as 
Sonia Chitrakar and her father “created a scroll song on safety norms that 
prompted the state government to ask them to travel from village to village, 
showcasing their Pattachitra and song to create awareness” (Bhuyan). Similarly, 
Swarna Chitrak ar, Gurupada Chitrakar, Yakub Chitrakar, Jaba Chitrakar, 
Khaleda Chitrakar, and Rani Chitrakar, among others, have composed songs 
and Pattachitra paintings on COVID -19 and shared the videos online on the 
Youtube channel The Scrollpainters of Naya, Pingla.  
Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan 
128  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
DURGA BAI VYAM’S “SAMUDRA MANTHAN” 
“Samudra Manthan” (2021) is a Gond painting by Durga Bai Vyam, one 
of the leading artists working in the Pardhan-Gond tradition of tribal art. 
“Samudra Manthan,” loosely translated as ‘the churning of the ocean,’ engages 
with motifs drawn from the Indian myth of Samudra Manthan  to construct a 
complex intertextual framework that establishes parallels with the realities of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, simultaneously serving as an allegorical commentary 
on the necessity of precautionary measures and broader discours es on 
environmental degradation and ecological harmony. Vyam’s painting appears 
in the 2021 pictorial diary (titled Indian Art Traditions in Transition) published by 
the Marg Foundation for the Indian multinational conglomerate, The Tata 
Group. Drawing inspiration from the art practiced in her native village of 
Burbaspur in Madhya Pradesh (India), Bhopal-based Durga Bai Vyam captures 
the essence of her indigenous heritage in her art. Vyam has contributed to 
several books, including The Night Life of Trees  (2006), One, Two, Tree!  (2003), 
Sultana’s Dream (2005), and Bhimayana: Experiences of Untouchability  (2011). For 
preserving indigenous cultural heritage and her contributions to sustain and 
popularize Gond art, Durga Bai Vyam was awarded the Padma Shri, India’s 
fourth-highest civilian honor, in 2022.  
Traditionally, Gond (derived from Kond, meaning ‘green mountain’) art 
is associated with the Gond tribal community of India. Gond art presents a range 
of goddesses, rivers, trees, a variety of animals (tigers, deer, peacocks, fish, 
garden lizards), fantastical creatures (such as Anand Singh Shyam’s cat with 
four grinning heads), tribal gods (with abstract and at times grotesque form s) 
and occasionally mainstream Hindu gods in bright colors. Apart from nature 
(especially trees), Gond art heavily draws on stories and symbolism from Hindu 
mythology and folk tales. Though Gond paintings are two-dimensional with no 
horizon and depth, the patterns impart the “illusion of texture and movement 
in figures that are rendered flat” (Chatterji 111). Initially drawn on mud, stone 
walls, and courtyards of homes, Gond art later gained popularity through 
Jangarh Singh Shyam, who first drew Gond art on canvas and paper, thereby 
paving the way for its internationalization as a distinct art form. Each artist uses 
their own disti nctive pattern like pointillist dots, fine dashes, semicircles, and 
minute waves, among others, which becomes their “unique signature” style 
(“Indian” 3:39). Therefore, even if two artists draw the same figure, the art 
would be different based on the kinds of pattern they choose to work with. Such 
preoccupation with individual style and pattern, however, is not organic as it 
rarely grows out of creativity; as Gond artist Anand Singh Shyam highlights, “At 
first Narmada Prasad and I both did bindi (dot) work like Jangarh, but when we 
saw that his work was selling and ours was not we decided to change our style” 
(Chatterji 1). They began “using different kinds of lines instead,” since city 
Pandemic Mythmaking: COVID-19 and Mythological Symbolism in Indian Folk Art 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  129 
visitors to their exhibitions made them self-conscious about style, leading every 
Gond painter to now choose a distinctive pattern as their signature (1). Vyam’s 
painting exhibits a hybrid pattern characterized by an intricate interplay of 
elongated lines, short dashes, and parabola-like motifs, creating a dynamic and 
textured visual composition. 
Vyam’s painting deftly reimagines the churning of the primordial 
ocean as a metaphorical representation of the global crisis engendered by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Though various versions of Samudra Manthan  can be 
found in Indian epics such as the Mahabharata and Ramayana, and scripture such 
as Kurma Purana, Bhagavata Purana, and Brahma Purana among others, the myth 
is popularly associated with the Vishnu Purana. Puranas (meaning ‘ancient’ or 
‘old’) are the Hindu scriptures containing encyclopedic information about the 
universe’s origin, mythology, genealogy and exploits of gods, goddesses and 
kings, astronomy, geography, and religious sites among others. Similarly, the 
Hindu Mahapuranas (meaning ‘greater Puranas’) are influential religious texts 
that transmit knowledge through various anecdotal stories. One of the eighteen 
Mahapuranas, Vishnu Puran centers around the stories involving one of the key 
deities in Hinduism, known as the preserver of the world, Lord Vishnu, and his 
various avatars (incarnations). Containing 126 chapters and 23,000 verses in 
Sanskrit (ancient Indian language), Vishnu Purana is one Mahapurana that has 
survived the test of time and has been preserved and widely translated into 
English, German, and other regional Indian languages.  
According to the original narrative, the churning of the milk ocean 
(mythical ocean in Hindu mythology) was facilitated by Lord Vishnu  in his 
Kurma (tortoise) incarnation. In post -Vedic literature, the Kurma avatar  is the 
second incarnation —among the Dasavatara (ten incarnation) —of Lord Vishnu,  
who appears to stabilize a sinking Mandara mountain. Using Mount Mandara as 
the churning rod and Vasuki (King of Serpents) as the churning rope, the Devas 
(celestial beings) on one side and the Asuras (demons) on the other, churned the 
ocean for the divine nectar of immortality, Amrita. The churning revealed 
various celestial treasures (varying from nine to fourteen in different versions of 
the text), such as the Goddess Lakshmi  (the divine consort of Lord Vishnu), 
Kamadhenu (the wish-fulfilling cow), Apsaras (divine women), the deadly poison 
Halahala (which Lord Shiva  heroically consumed to safeguard the cosmos), 
Chandra (the moon), Varuni (the goddess of wine), Parijata (night-flowering 
jasmine plant), gems such as t he Kausthubha (worn on the chest of Lord Vishnu) 
and Chintamani (wish-fulfilling gem), and finally Amrita.  
Drawn on paper using acrylic colors, Vyam’s “ Samudra Manthan”  
depicts a long serpent coiled around the figure of a woman at the center of the 
painting. Vyam’s striking portrayal serves as a poignant reminder of the fragile 
balance of life and the global interconnectedness, especially, between human 
Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan 
130  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
health and the natural world. Humans and animals are seen simultaneously 
holding onto the head and the tail end of the snake, much like the Asuras and 
Devas in the original mythic story of the Samudra Manthan. Through her vivid 
imagery, she depicts human figures grasping the head of the snake —
symbolizing the Asuras or demons—while various animals gather near its tail, 
representing the Devas or celestial beings. This powerful juxtaposition highlights 
the enduring tension between chaos and harmony in the shared ecosystems that 
sustain us. In depicting humans as a metaphorical equivalent of demons, Vyam 
holds humans responsible for ecological di sbalance, pollution, and 
environmental degradation and urges them to work with (and not against) other 
organisms surrounding them. Indian mythologist Devdutt Pattanaik highlights 
the unique nature of the Samudra Manthan episode in Hindu mythology, where 
Devas and Asuras harmoniously unite to accomplish a shared objective. Unlike 
a competitive game of tug of war that focuses on strength and rivalry, churning 
requires a meticulously orchestrated collaboration, wherein one group pulls 
while the other releases (“Symbolism” 2:00–2:41).  
Such a well -choreographed collaboration highlights the posthuman 
interdependence between humans, animals, microbes, and the environment, 
challenging anthropocentrism by positioning humans as one actor in the 
broader ecological network. Posthumanism is a “m ode of thinking about the 
intersecting human, nonhuman, and technological worlds that has gained 
theoretical currency in the late twentieth and twenty -first centuries, especially 
in the wake of ecological consciousness and environmental campaigns that call  
into question the role of humans in shaping the fate of the Earth” (Nayar). The 
COVID-19 pandemic served as a stark reminder that even an invisible virus like 
SARS-CoV-2 can deeply impact global human existence. Following the 
pandemic, there has been a re newed emphasis on traditional modes of living 
that aim to strike a balance between human needs and the well -being of other 
living beings and the environment. The posthuman perspective aligns with the 
ethos of Gond folk art, which Vyam uses to reaffirm huma n being’s 
interconnectedness with the natural world and the importance of universal well-
being. Hence, in simultaneously depicting animals and humans working 
together, Vyam establishes the fundamental relationality and entanglement of 
all living beings in our interconnected ecosystem. 
Vyam is proficient in the motifs that characterize the Gond art form, 
such as “the undulating trees, the striking plumage of birds and the delicate 
features of forest animals” (Shankar). Concurrently, Vyam elevates these motifs 
beyond mere representations of mythic or folk tales by imbuing them with 
metaphorical significance. For instance, Vyam superimposes the figure of a 
salwar-clad (long, loose-fitting tunic and trousers worn in India) woman on the 
outline of a tree with spread roots and branches to sign ify mother nature on 
Pandemic Mythmaking: COVID-19 and Mythological Symbolism in Indian Folk Art 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  131 
whose branches reside human beings. Vyam interestingly depicts houses (with 
people inside them) hanging from the branches of this woman -tree, signifying 
that we are only a single leaf, fruit, and flower of a tree representative of nature. 
In so doing, the artist deliberately conjures a vision of our interconnected, 
networked existence in a well -painted tapestry as delineated in the painting. 
Though humans are not the central focus in Vyam’s painting, the visual 
underscores the idea that every individual is an integral part of a larger 
ecosystem, sustaining diverse life forms and that individuals have the social 
responsibility to adhere to pandemic guidelines. 
On the extreme top left corner of the painting, Vyam depicts a man 
drinking from a blue-colored leaf. This striking image reminds one of Lord Shiva 
drinking the poison Halahal (one of the 14 treasures of Samudra Manthan), which 
turns his neck blue. As a metaphor, this image is representative of all the 
negative consequences of the pandemic, such as contracting the disease, death, 
deteriorating mental health, stress, and anxiety, among others. Similarly, in the 
extreme top right corner of the painting, Vyam depicts a man beating a metal 
instrument with a stick. This image refers to a common practice in India during 
COVID, when people used to come out to the balconies of their houses and beat 
utensils, clap, and blow conch shells to thank the front -line workers, especially 
doctors, for their service to the community. The painting also features a pot 
representative of the Amrit Kalash (pot containing the nectar of immortality), on 
top of which is a lit clay lamp. Both the pot and the lit lamp are positive symbols 
that tie in with the image of individuals staying at home to convey how adhering 
to COVID -19 precautions can help combat the pandemic successfully. By 
leveraging the emotive power of folk art, Vyam skillfully conveys hope, 
resilience, and unity, encourag ing viewers to confront the challenges of the 
COVID era with renewed strength and solidarity. Ultimately, “ Samudra 
Manthan” is a poignant testament to the enduring capacity of art to transcend 
time, culture, and circumstance to offer solace and inspiration  in the face of 
adversity. 
 
“CORONA RAKSHASA”: DRAWING MALEVOLENCE 
Rupsona and Bahadur Chitrakar’s “ Corona Rakshasa ” (2021) is a 
Pattachitra painting from the Indian state of West Bengal, published in the Indian 
Art Traditions in Transition. By invoking the imagery of a Rakshasa, a Sanskrit 
word denoting a malevolent demon in Indian mythology, folklore, and religious 
traditions, the artists underscore the sinister and menacing nature of SARS-CoV-
2 that transcends geographical boundaries. Belonging to a lineage of Patuas, 
traveling storytellers who used scroll paintings to narrate (and sing) 
mythological tales, Rupsona and Bahadur Chitrakar are a daughter-father artist 
duo from the Naya village of Pingala block in west Medinapur district of West 
Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan 
132  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Bengal. Starting painting at the age of six, Rupsona Chitrakar learned the 
Pattachitra from her father and grandmother and has since exhibited her 
paintings on various national and international platforms. In terms of form, 
“Corona Rakshasa”  embodies the distinctive stylistic features of Pattachitra 
painting, including elongated and slightly hooded eyes, delicate brush strokes, 
colorful composition, and aesthetically refined figures. The depiction of the 
Corona demon, the dragon, and the human characters al l exhibit the 
characteristic slender and elongated forms associated with this traditional art 
style. 
A combination of the Sanskrit word patta (woven) and chitra (art), 
Pattachitra is a folk art form from Odisha and West Bengal and is distinguished 
by its intricate mythological narratives painted on cloth, dried palm leaves, and 
in later times, canvas, featuring detailed borders, bright colors, sharp details, 
and lacquer coated surf aces. While the Pattachitra tradition in Odisha remains 
primarily focused on visual art, its counterpart in West Bengal, particularly 
within the Patua tradition, integrates both music and painting as part of its 
performative tradition. The scroll format of  Pattachitra enables the vertical 
depiction of sequential images, a structural feature that “allows for a succession 
of frames,” thereby “expand[ing] the spatial field of the pictorial narrative” 
(Chatterji 215). The act of “rolling and unrolling the painted scroll” to reveal one 
frame at a time further introduces the “suggestion of movement and temporal 
depth” (215). Typically ranging from 10 to 20 feet in length, Pattachitra scrolls 
are “lined with fabric on the back to give them their characteristic roll ed shape 
and make them more comfortable to carry and preserve” (Zanatta and Roy 61). 
Traditionally, Pattachitra scrolls were not intended for commercial sale; instead, 
they were repeatedly used by artists in various storytelling performances. 
However, with the advent of new forms of entertainment and the gradual 
decline of the traveling storyteller tradition, Pattachitra paintings have 
increasingly been commodified.  
Rupsona and Bahadur Chitrakar’s “ Corona Rakshasa”  visually 
articulates the pervasive impact of the SARS -CoV-2 virus by representing the 
pandemic at its most fundamental, viral level, emphasizing its global spread and 
catastrophic consequences. Set against a striking yellow background, the 
painting features a red-hued demon with horns and elongated nails alongside a 
dragon-like figure that encircles the Earth, which is nestled within its coiled 
body. Two human figures are positioned at the bottom left and ri ght corners, 
further grounding the composition in a human-centric perspective. Notably, the 
Corona Rakshasa is composed of numerous individual virus cells, a motif that 
extends to the similarly red-colored dragon above it. This visual representation 
evokes the myth of Raktabīja, a demon from Hindu mythology whose spilled 
blood generates endless clones of himself, thereby symbolizing the virus’s 
Pandemic Mythmaking: COVID-19 and Mythological Symbolism in Indian Folk Art 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  133 
widespread proliferation and ability to self-replicate, underscoring the insidious 
nature of the pandemic. 
The myth of Raktabīja, derived from the Sanskrit words rakta (blood) 
and bīja (seed), narrates the rise and fall of a formidable demon of the same name 
who, through a boon granted by Lord Shiva , acquired the ability to generate 
identical replicas of himself, equal in form and strength, whenever a drop of his 
blood touched the ground. Raktabīja’s myth is part of Devi Mahatmya  or Devi 
Mahatmyam, a seminal text within the Mārkandeya Purāna that contains the oldest 
myths regarding female deities who are depicte d as powerful (and even 
wrathful) gods. Though Lord Shiva’s boon renders Raktabīja nearly invincible, 
Goddess Kali (Goddess of death and destruction), acting at the behest of Goddess 
Durga (a major Hindu goddess), consumed every drop of his blood directly from 
his body and his innumerable clones on the battlefield, thereby ensuring his 
ultimate demise. However, such relentless violence plunged Goddess Kali into an 
uncontrollable frenzy of destruction, setting her off a rampage that halted only 
when she stepped on Lord Shiva (her husband), awakening from her bloodlust 
and, in a moment of realization, biting her tongue, an image central to her 
iconography. 
By depicting the Corona Rakshasa  in the likeness of Raktabīja, the 
painting underscores the inherent challenge s of containing the COVID -19 
pandemic at its source, as the SARS -CoV-2 virus replicated at exponential 
spread and continuous mutations lead to the emergence of multiple variants in 
the later stages of the pandemic. At the viral level, there existed no defin itive 
means to halt its spread, leaving individuals reliant on precautionary measures 
that, while necessary, remained only partially effective due to the airborne and 
invisible nature of the virus. This characteristic rendered accidental 
transmission highly plausible, reinforcing the perception of the virus as an 
almost invincible force. However, much like the mythological defeat of Raktabīja 
by Goddess Kali, the eventual development and distribution of vaccines such as 
Moderna, AstraZeneca, and Covishield played a crucial role in mitigating the 
virus’s impact. These vaccines effectively transformed the SARS -CoV-2 virus 
from an existential threat into a largely manageable health concern. 
The imagery of the dragon in the painting holds significant symbolic 
weight, as it represents China, where the SARS -CoV-2 virus is widely believed 
to have originated. The dragon, depicted in red to mirror the corona demon, is 
composed of countless viral pa rticles, signifying the initial proliferation of the 
virus within China before it spread globally. This interpretation is further 
reinforced by the multi-colored globe resting on the curve of the dragon’s body, 
visually suggesting the virus’s global reach and capacity to traverse borders. The 
two figures in the lower part of the painting represent the global population 
observing the unfolding of the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, the pervasive 
Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan 
134  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
nature of the virus is emphasized through the border of the painting, which is 
populated by various stylized anthropomorphic depictions of the virus, further 
reinforcing its omnipresence and global impact. The repetition of these 
individualized viral faces  across the painting’s borders suggests a sense of 
inescapability, emphasizing the virus’s ability to multiply, mutate, and persist 
despite human efforts to contain it. 
Notably, the virus in the painting is represented through two distinct 
visual strategies: first, as minute circular particles dispersed across the body of 
the dragon and certain parts of the Corona Rakshasa , and second, as 
anthropomorphized, individualized faces integrated into the body of the corona 
demon. In the first instance, the depiction of the virus as tiny particles in the 
painting aligns with its biological reality as a microscopic pathogen, 
emphasizing its omnipresence thereby reinforcing its near -imperceptibility, 
uncontrollable spread, and capacity to embed itself within hosts in ways that 
challenge human perception and control. In the second instance, the 
anthropomorphized face transforms an invisible pathogen into a recognizable, 
almost mythica l antagonist and evokes the longstanding human tendency to 
attribute agency and malevolence to diseases. In conclusion, by employing both 
microscopic realism and mythic personification, the painting bridges scientific 
understanding and cultural imagination, underscoring the idea that the COVID-19 
pandemic is not just a biological and virological phenomenon but also a collective 
socio-cultural experience.  
 
CODA 
Artists infuse mythological elements into pandemic -themed works to 
bridge temporal and cultural gaps and tap into a collective reservoir of shared 
emotions and experiences. Since mythologies are not just stories that entertain 
but also metaphors that encom pass age-old wisdom, values, and philosophies, 
artists all over the world deployed different mediums of representation (such as 
cartoons, comics, and folk art) and repurposed mythological stories to illustrate 
COVID-related issues. Through mythological ret ellings, artists can 
contextualize these emotions, drawing parallels between ancient tales of chaos, 
disease, and heroism with the current pandemic’s challenges. Vyam ingeniously 
weaves the mythical tale of the Samudra Manthan  into her artistic narrative, 
utilizing its allegorical power to advocate for the adoption of COVID 
precautionary measures. Moreover, Vyam criticizes the current neo -capitalist 
societal framework that prioritizes human interests to the detriment of other 
species and advocates for a more sustainable way of life that acknowledges and 
accommodates a networked and relational existence. Similarly, Rupsona and 
Bahadur Chitrakar’s “ Corona Rakshasa” draws on the Indian myth of Raktabīja 
and uses the motif of a demon to frame the SARS -CoV-2 virus not merely as a 
Pandemic Mythmaking: COVID-19 and Mythological Symbolism in Indian Folk Art 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  135 
biological entity but as an active, threatening, and malevolent entity. 
Furthermore, the pattachitra painting highlights the all -pervasive nature of the 
SARS-CoV-2 virus and alludes to the difficulty in containing and managing the 
viral spread. Put together, the utilization of mythological elements in both these 
paintings has enabled a richer exploration  of the pandemic’s impact, 
transcending geographical boundaries to establish a universal connection with 
the audience.  
 
 
WORKS CITED 
Bhuyan, Avantika. “Folk Artists as Record-Keepers of the Pandemic.” Mintlounge, 3 
July 2021, lifestyle.livemint.com/how-to-lounge/art-culture/folk-artists-as-
record-keepers-of-the-pandemic-111625246234414.html. 
Chatterji, Roma. Speaking with Pictures: Folk Art and the Narrative Tradition in India . 
Routledge India, 2020.  
Chitrakar, Rupsona, and Bahadur Chitrakar. “Corona Rakshasa.” Indian Art Traditions 
in Transition, The Marg Foundation, 2021. 
Gangopadhyay, Uttara. “The Pandemic Shows up in India’s Folk Art.” 
Outlooktraveller/, 
www.outlookindia.com/outlooktraveller/travelnews/story/70449/indian-folk-
art-and-the-pandemic. Accessed 28 July 2023. 
“Indian Folk Artist | Gond Art | All You Need to Know about Gond Art.” Arta, YouTube, 
13 Feb. 2020, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9hmS-yFuQwM. Accessed 28 
July 2023. 
The Marg Foundation. “Indian Art Traditions in Transition.” Indian Art Traditions in 
Transition, The Marg Foundation, 2021.  
Nayar, Pramod. “Posthumanism.” Oxford Bibliography , 21 Feb. 2023, 
www.oxfordbibliographies.com/display/document/obo-9780190221911/obo-
9780190221911-0122.xml#:~:text=Posthumanism%20is%20a%20mode%20of, 
role%20of%20humans%20in%20shaping. 
Revill, George. “Folk Culture and Geography.” Oxford Bibliographies , 
www.oxfordbibliographies.com/display/document/obo-9780199874002/obo-
9780199874002-0092.xml#:~:text=obo%2F9780199874002%2D0092-,Introduction, 
sense%20of%20place%2C%20and%20belonging. Accessed 28 July 2023. 
Shankar, Avantika. “Padma Shri Awardee Durgabai Vyam Represents a Shift in the 
Way Folk Art Is Perceived.” Vogue India, 4 Feb. 2022, www.vogue.in/culture -
and-living/content/padma-shri-awardee-durgabai-vyam-sees-the-world-in-
stories-folk-art-gond. 
“Symbolism and Stories of Amrit Manthan | Devlok Mini with Devdutt Pattanaik.” 
The Epic Channel , YouTube, 22 Feb. 2019, https://www.youtube.com/ 
watch?v=nveNOyh86EE. Accessed 28 July 2023. 
Umbach, Maiken, and Bernd Hüppauf, editors . Vernacular Modernism: Heimat, 
Globalization, and the Built Environment. Stanford UP, 2005. 
Ishani Anwesha Joshi and Sathyaraj Venkatesan 
136  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Venkatesan, Sathyaraj. “Indian Folk Art and Covid -19.” Medical Humanities, 14 Jan. 
2022, blogs.bmj.com/medical-humanities/2022/01/18/indian-folk-art-and-covid-19/. 
Vyam, Durga Bai. “ Samudra Manthan.” Indian Art Traditions in Transition , The Marg 
Foundation, 2021. 
Zanatta, Maura, and Anjali Gera Roy. “Facing the Pandemic: A Perspective on 
Patachitra Artists of West Bengal.” Arts, vol. 10, no. 3, 31 Aug. 2021, p. 61, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/arts10030061.  
 
 
ISHANI ANWESHA JOSHI is a research scholar in the Department of Humanities and 
Social Sciences at the National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli, India. She 
specializes in Graphic Medicine, Health Humanities, Pandemic Studies, and Comic 
Studies. Her research articles have been published in various indexed journals such 
as Medical Humanities, Visual Studies, Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, Journal of 
Medical Humanities , and Journal of Graphic Novels and Comics  among others. Her 
forthcoming co-authored monograph, Drawing the Pandemic: COVID-19 and Graphic 
Medicine, is under contract with Palgrave Macmillan and is scheduled for publication 
in 2025. 
 
DR. SATHYARAJ VENKATESAN is a Professor of English at the Department of 
Humanities and Social Sciences in National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli 
(India). His research concentrates on graphic medicine, literary health humanities 
and American literature. He is the author  of nine books and over hundred research 
articles. His recent co -authored/co-edited books are India Retold  (New York: 
Bloomsbury, 2021) and Pandemics and Epidemics in Cultural Representation (Singapore: 
Springer, 2022). 
 
 
 
  

  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  137 
 
 
         ARRY POTTER AND THE GOBLET OF BEOWULF :  
                           ROWLING ’S BEOWULFIAN ALLUSIONS ,  
                              ANALOGUES , AND INVERSIONS  
 
                                       MARK-ELLIOT FINLEY  
 
 
E MUST PERFORM THREE TASKS , including battling a dragon, diving into 
hellish water, and fighting against a primordial evil figure in single combat. 
He is mythic but has character flaws. If this description were given to Generation 
Z or Millennial fantasy literature fans, they might assume this sketch belongs to 
“The Boy Who Lived” —Harry Potter —and specifically his three tasks in the 
Triwizard Tournament within J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire . 
However, if an Old English scholar were given this character description, 
Beowulf, King of the Geats, might come to mind.  
In this essay, I suggest Rowling’s Goblet of Fire literarily echoes the Old 
English1 epic poem Beowulf, while simultaneously updating the medieval epic 
to reflect the novel’s place within the modernized, Christian-influenced fantasy 
tradition. While Laurie Beckoff, in her blog on MuggleNet.com, links Beowulf’s 
swimming contest (lines 499 –581) with Harry’s second task —the lake 
challenge—this essay engages in a sustained dialogue between Beowulf and 
Goblet of Fire. Both heroes engage in one -to-one combat (Beowulf with Grendel 
and Harry with Voldemort), venture into an unknown watery abyss (Beowulf 
diving into Grendel’s mother’s underwater cave and Harry rescuing Ron and 
Gabrielle from the merpeople in Hogwarts’s Lake ), and fight a dragon 
(Beowulf’s final fight and Harry’s fight with the Hungarian Horntail). I argue  
 
1 I use the term “Old English” rather than “Anglo-Saxon” due to recent critical discussions 
surrounding the latter term and its racial undertones. David Wilton notes “the term 
[Anglo-Saxon] is an identity label associated with whiteness and is often the sel f-
identification preferred by white supremacists” (425). Substitutes for “Anglo -Saxon” 
include, as Wilton notes, “Old English” or “early medieval English,” with use of the latter 
phrase commonly used “when one wants to blur the silos of periodization betwe en Old 
and Middle English” (453). “Early English,” while a possible substitute, poses issues due 
to the “vagueness” of the term: “Not only is it already a term for the Gothic architectural 
style of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, it risks confusion with ‘early modern English,’ 
and there is no general agreement on what its chronological boundaries are, it being used 
to encompass anything prior to 1800” (453). For more on the term “Anglo -Saxon,” its 
linguistic history, racial undercurrents, and problema tic usage within pre -Conquest/ 
medieval studies, see Wilton. 
H 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
138  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Goblet of Fire , if read in parallel with Beowulf, presents us with mirrors and 
inversions of the Beowulfian duel sequence, highlighting thematic and 
characterological analogues between Harry and Beowulf. The fourth Potter 
novel, whether consciously or otherwise, reflects symbolic elements from the 
Old English epic poem, and such Beowulfian reflections allow us to further 
appreciate Rowling’s unique themes, which sometimes align with and 
sometimes depart from the novel’s Old English predecessor. 
Beowulf and Goblet of Fire balance Christian and pagan elements 2 and 
have been read as hagiographies 3 featuring a salvific redemptive epic hero 4 
casted within an archetypal mold, 5 contributing to what Annie Hiebert Alton 
calls “a generic mosaic,” as Rowling “fuses” genres together to “creat[e] 
something new” (159). I contend Rowling’s “generic mosaic” can also 
incorporate allusions, or at least analogues, to the Old English epic, m apping 
Beowulf’s challenges onto Harry’s three tasks. This comparative reading 
progresses chronologically through Harry’s three Triwizard challenges, 
illustrating how Harry’s first task echoes Beowulf’s third fight with the dragon 
and Beowulf’s mere episod e aligns with Harry’s second task. Harry’s final 
challenge, fighting the risen Lord Voldemort, 6 borrows from the Grendel and 
dragon encounters, with Voldemort encapsulating Beowulf’s first and third 
antagonists. While Goblet of Fire’s instances of thematic and visual echoes from 
 
2 For more on scholarly reception to the Christian and pagan elements in Beowulf and Harry 
Potter, see the Appendix. 
3 “[H]agiographies,” writes Jordan Jones, “tell the stories of saints’ lives and are written to 
edify readers or listeners. […] [T]hey can focus on the death of the saint (these stories are 
called ‘passions’) or they can focus on the life of the saint (these stories are called ‘vitae’)” 
(2). For Beowulf as a hagiography, see Jones; for Harry Potter, see Hennequin. 
4 For Beowulf as a redemptive salvific figure see Fisher 173, Taylor 233, Cabaniss 195 –96, 
and McNamee 191. For readings refuting Beowulf as a Christian redemptive figure, see 
Finnegan 54 and Reynolds 28. Harry is also viewed as an epic hero, but not exclusively as 
a redemptive savior, even though he exemplifies salvific attributes. For treatments of 
Rowling’s representation of heroism, see Heroism in the Harry Potter Series, edited by Katrin 
Berndt and Lena Steveker. For Harry’s selfless actions, see Berman 48 and Rosser 240. For 
Harry’s connection with Christian redemption and salvation, see Anatol xxiin4. 
5 McNulty observes Rowling’s “epic saga” pattern, as each novel can be traced onto Joseph 
Campbell’s hero’s journey (55), as does Boll (85). Pharr claims Rowling combines elements 
from the epic tradition and postmodern style into her heptalogy. Mills reads Harry as a 
Jungian archetypal child, a salvific figure facing the risk of death (7 –8). Similarly, 
Helterman suggests we read Beowulf as a Jungian archetypal character (3).   
6 Harry’s third Triwizard Tournament task is the maze, consisting of Hagrid’s Blast-Ended 
Skrewts (31.622, 625), a boggart (31.623), an anti -gravity enchanted mist (31.624), Victor 
Krum’s Cruciatus Curse (31.626–27), and a riddling sphinx (31.628–30). However, Harry’s 
true challenge is his duel with Voldemort.  
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  139 
Beowulf could be read as alluding7 to the epic, where I discuss Old English words 
or passages, such connections are at the most analogues.8 However, Goblet of Fire 
reflects yet transforms elements from Beowulf within its narrative, allowing us 
to further appreciate Rowling’s piece as a work of mythopoetic literature. 
 
THE DRAGON 
Perhaps the dragons are the most obvious connections between Beowulf 
and Goblet of Fire. Beowulf’s dragon appears last in the epic’s monster cycle, after 
waking up and realizing his treasure has been robbed. The dragon was 
“writhing with anger / When he saw the footprints of the prowler who had 
stolen [a cup] / Too close to his dreaming head ” (lines 2288–90).9 Similarly, the 
Triwizard champions’ first challenge is to get past their respective dragons and 
grab a golden egg (20.340 –41). Lauren Berman claims Harry is comparable to 
mythic “dragon –slayers” who seek treasure guarded by an evil creature, like 
“Beowulf and the unnamed dragon he encounters in his final adventures” (61).10 
Expanding on Berman’s observation, I begin with connections between the 
dragon episodes, then examine shared thematic motifs present in Beowulf and 
Goblet of Fire, illustrating how Goblet of Fire uses the Beowulfian dragon episode 
for unique thematic ends.  
In Beowulf and Goblet of Fire —understandably—anxiety pervades the 
heroes’ encounter with their dragon. Hearing the dragon’s destructive rampage 
upon his kingdom, Beowulf’s “mind was in turmoil, / unaccustomed anxiety 
and gloom / confused his brain” (lines 2331 –33). The dragon’s attacks present 
not only anxiety -ridden confusion for the old king, but also the threatening 
unknown. Beowulf conquered Grendel and his mother but never faced a foe as 
fierce as “the fire-dragon / [who] had rased the coastal region and reduced / forts 
 
7 In Rowling’s novel, all Beowulfian connections are at the most implicit allusions and at 
the least analogues. The text never explicitly mentions Beowulf or any Old English terms, 
but due to the sustained connections between Beowulf and Goblet of Fire, specific links, such 
as the matching tasks, can be termed allusions. I cannot, however, claim Rowling 
intentionally incorporated Beowulfian elements into her novel. However, this caveat does 
not preclude us from a fruitful comparative study between these works. 
8 “[A]n analogue,” writes Chris Baldick, “is another story or plot which is parallel or 
similar in some way to the story under discussion” (11). An analogue could be a literary 
echo, either intentional or unintentional, by the author. 
9 Seamus Heaney’s modern English Beowulf translation will be used, unless otherwise noted.  
10 See Gibka 151–52 for similarities and differences between Rowling’s dragons with the 
dragon in Beowulf and Smaug in Tolkien’s The Hobbit. Gibka notes Rowling’s dragons are 
not shown as greedy and do not want to guard the golden eggs, which is why they do not 
attack the surrounding area (151). Berman claims Rowling departs from the traditional, 
early medieval understandings of dragons as sy mbols of greed and sin, rather 
characterizing her dragons as not tied to either good or evil (45), but as neutral (54). 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
140  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
and earthworks to dust and ashes” (lines 2333–35). The dragon represents a new 
threat, Beowulf’s last test of kingly courage. Likewise, Harry, having learned 
about the first task from Hagrid, is in “a state of nervousness so advanced that 
he wondered whether he mightn’t just lose his head when they tried to lead him 
out to his dragon” (20.347). Harry, like Beowulf, learns about his opponent 
before the confrontation, but this prior knowledge yields to our heroes’ anxiety. 
Harry thinks he might “lose his head ” and Beowulf’s “mind was in turmoil,” 
demonstrating the dragons’ effects on the heroes’ mental states. Beowulf, having 
had combat experience ruling the Geats “well / For fifty winters” (lines 2208 –
09), “planned and plotted his revenge” against the dragon (line 2336).  
By contrast, Harry feels completely unprepared for the dragon and the 
Triwizard Tournament on the whole. Whereas Beowulf had fifty years of ruling 
his kingdom to prepare for the dragon, Harry, a fourteen -year-old misfit, has 
only two months, near zero prep aration time. While Harry has fought 
Voldemort and a basilisk in his first and second years, a full -grown dragon is a 
completely different challenge. Reading Goblet of Fire and Beowulf in parallel, we 
see how Harry’s maturation process is contrasted and inverted with Beowulf’s, 
demonstrating Harry’s heroic intensification as he prepares for his fight with the 
dragon. However, regardless of the heroes’ anxiety or how much preparation 
time they are afforded, both must face their gold-guarding dragons.  
Beowulf’s dragon dwelled amongst “a treasure -trove of astonishing 
richness” (line 2757), which showed “signs that someone had stumbled upon / 
the golden treasures” (lines 2301 –02), causing the dragon to destroy the Geats’ 
kingdom because a “gold -plated cup” was stolen (line 2282). 11 Likewise, 
Triwizard champions must take the golden egg which is guarded by their 
dragons (20.349). Each champion becomes a Beowulfian “prowler” stealing 
treasure from a brooding dragon (line 2289).12 During their battles, Beowulf and 
Harry receive similar bodily injuries. Beowulf is caught “in a rush of flame and 
 
11 While outside the scope of this essay, in Rowling’s seventh and final installment, Harry 
Potter and the Deathly Hallows, the trio break into Gringotts, requiring them to sneak past a 
dragon, which guards the vaults. Inside Bellatrix’s vault, the friends steal one of 
Voldemort’s horcruxes, “the cup that had belonged to Helga Hufflepuff, which had 
passed into the possession o f Hepzibah Smith, from whom it had been stolen by Tom 
Riddle” (26.538). The sequence in Deathly Hallows provides a literary rhyme to the first 
task in Goblet of Fire, demonstrating possible Beowulfian influences throughout the series.  
12 In Rowling’s text, the Hungarian Horntail does not escape the enclosure. But in the 2005 
film adaptation, Harry, retrieving his Firebolt with a summoning charm, takes flight, 
causing the dragon to break from its chains and chase Harry around the school’s grounds 
(1:00:20–1:02:44). While I am not claiming the filmmakers consciously pulled from the Old 
English epic, analogues also exist between Beowulf’s dragon raiding the Geats’ kingdom 
and the Hungarian Horntail terrorizing the Hogwarts Castle in the film.  
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  141 
[the dragon] clamped sharp fangs / into his neck” (lines 2691–93). Similarly, the 
Hungarian Horntail injures Harry: its “tail came whipping up to meet him […] 
and as he swerved to the left, one of the long spikes grazed his shoulder, ripping 
his robes—He could feel it stinging” (20.355). These observations invite dee per 
interrogation between these dragon episodes to uncover how Goblet of Fire  
shares and departs from Beowulfian themes. The first shared thematic motif 
exemplified in Beowulf and Goblet of Fire are the heroes’ courage.  
Beowulf’s dragon duel underscores courage as an underlying thematic 
principle. Beowulf tells his retainers, “I shall win the gold / by my courage, or 
else mortal combat, / doom of battle, will bear your lord away” (lines 2535 –37). 
If Beowulf’s courage fails, he will meet “the doom of battle,” accepting his death 
as a consequence for relinquishing courage. Rowling’s fourth novel also 
structures the first task around the same virtue found in Beowulf. “The first task,” 
says Barty Crouch, “is designed to test your daring, […] so we are not going to 
be telling you what it is. Courage in the face of the unknown is an important 
quality in a wizard . . . very important” (17 .281). While two champions are not 
surprised by the dragons (Harry and Cedric), courage is nevertheless required 
for the young wizards when facing the creatures. Similarly, Beowulf does not 
shy from danger; rather, the possibility of retrieving gold imbues his motivation 
with the kingly courage needed to face his final monster.  
Arguably, Beowulf’s courage leads to his pride. Beowulf states he 
“shall win the gold” (line 2535). Further, the poet claims Beowulf  
 
                     was too proud  
to line up with a large army 
against the sky-plague. He had scant regard 
for the dragon as a threat, no dread at all 
of its courage or strength […]. (lines 2345–49) 
 
Some critics suggest Beowulf’s pride must be purged during his dragon duel. 
Margaret E. Goldsmith claims Beowulf struggles with “the sins of the dragon”—
pride—as he vaunts the claim that only he can win the dragon’s treasure (“The 
Christian Theme” 95).13 Goldsmith posits Beowulf gave himself to the Christian 
God during prior battles (95), but in his final combat, the temptation of gold —
possibly greed? —is symbolized in the dragon’s hoard, alluding to Beowulf’s 
pride (100). Beowulf must fight a literal dragon and the prideful dragon within.14 
 
13 See Marshall 2 –3 for other critics’ readings of Beowulf’s pride in connection with his 
desire for the dragon’s gold.  
14 Leyerle claims Beowulf becomes more prideful with each monster he defeats (101 –02), 
but Baker notes Beowulf’s action—risking his life for his kingdom —was not “irrational” 
as such defensive actions from Beowulf and his troops “must have exceeded the risk o f 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
142  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Pride tempts Harry, as well. Before his dragon fight, Harry must resist 
the pride coming with Gryffindor House “all treating him like some sort of 
hero” (18.288). The Goblet selected Harry, an inexperienced teen wizard, when 
Dumbledore’s Age Line supposedl y prevented students under seventeen from 
competing. Harry, already “The Chosen One,” must constantly check his ego; as 
Hermione tells Harry, “it’s always you who gets all the attention[.] […] [Y]ou’re 
really famous” (18.289 –90). When Harry is selected as a Triwizard champion, 
Ron feels left out, and asks Harry how he did it, causing Harry to defend himself 
(17.286). Ron, Hermione observes, is “always shunted to one side whenever 
people see you [Harry], and he puts up with it, and he never mentions it, but I 
suppose this is just one time too many . . . . “ (18.290). Thinking Harry lied to 
him, Ron becomes embittered, leading to a fight between the boys. Harry feels 
like “he could have coped with the rest of the school’s behavior if he could just 
have had Ron back as a friend” but he refuses to swallow his pride, deciding “he 
wasn’t going to try and persuade Ron to talk to him if Ron didn’t want to” 
(18.296), causing Harry to start “hat[ing] everything about Ron” (19.335). 
Harry’s stubbornness reveals his “‘st reak of pride” (35.677). 15 The first task 
pushes Harry to his limit, causing him to recognize his prideful tendencies: “it 
was time to shelve his pride and see if Cedric’s hint [taking a bath with the egg] 
was worth anything” (24.457). Harry’s pride is the dominating character flaw he 
battles against when coming to the dragon fight. Harry and Beowulf must face 
and rein in their pride, an attribute personified in their respective dragons.  
Goblet of Fire , while borrowing the courage and pride themes from 
Beowulf, infuses original thematic elements into its Beowulfian dragon sequence. 
Harry grows in his confidence, interdependence, moral reasoning, and sense of 
fair play through his experience with the first Triwizard Task. Before facing the 
dragon, Harry, feeling  utterly unprepared, speaks to Sirius through the Floo 
Network. Believing someone is trying to kill him through the Tournament, 
Harry states, “They’ll just have to stand back and let the dragons do their stuff” 
(19.334). Similarly, in the film adaptation, Harry exclaims to his godfather, “I’m 
 
loss. We need to understand this aspect of the heroic economy” (218). For Baker, Beowulf 
acts according to traditional Old English kingly customs. And while Beowulf takes pride 
in being at the forefront of battles, standing as a fighting king until the las t stroke (lines 
2497–500), Baker acknowledges the Old English peoples did not critique this mindset 
(220).  
15 Barty Crouch Jr. says this when revealing himself to Harry after the third task. While his 
comments reflect aspects of Harry’s character, the text demonstrates Harry’s need and 
willingness for interdependence with the coming of the first task. Ironically, Crouch Jr., in 
the guise of Mad-Eye Moody, gives Harry the idea to fly in the first task (20.344), leading 
Harry to enlist Hermione’s help with the summoning charm (20.345). However, Crouch 
Jr.’s words illuminate a character flaw against which Harry must defend. 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  143 
not ready for this [the dragon and the Tournament], Sirius” (0:45:19 –0:45:21), 
doubting his natural abilities. The novel highlights Harry’s trepidation, allowing 
other characters to encourage him. Ironically, Barty Crouch Jr. (disguised as 
Mad-Eye Moody) emboldens Harry to “play to your strengths” (20.344). After 
Harry claims he lacks strengths, Crouch Jr. retorts, “you’ve got strengths if I say 
you’ve got them” (20.344). Crouch Jr. pushes Harry to ruminate on his abilities, 
causing Harry to realize his natural proclivity for Quidditch and uplifts Harry’s 
morale, telling him, “You’re a damn good flier from what I’ve heard” (20.344). 
Crouch Jr. speaks to Harry’s strengths when he feels inadequate, highlighting 
Harry’s need to realize his potential. Harry also  demonstrates his need for 
interdependence during his preparation for the first task. After Crouch Jr. tells 
Harry to use his broomstick against the dragon, Harry realizes he needs 
Hermione’s help (20.345). Hermione practices the summoning charm with him 
until a dictionary “flew across the room, and Harry caught it. ‘Harry, I really 
think you’ve got it!’ said Hermione delightedly” (20.347). Encouragement from 
others highlights the novel’s interdependence motif exemplified through the 
Beowulfian dragon task.  
 The first task also illustrates the dragon’s testing of Harry’s “moral 
reasoning and instinctive sense of fair play” (Berman 62). Harry implicitly 
acknowledges his pride, making amends with Ron (20.358). Berman claims the 
dragon represents Harry’s anger t oward Ron following their fight and the 
Hungarian Horntail mirrors Harry’s “internal struggle” (62). Such internalized 
toil might be read as Harry’s struggle to dominate his prideful Beowulfian 
tendencies. Harry’s triumph over the dragon, Berman claims, ep itomizes 
Harry’s ability “to tame his unruly passions” (62). In defeating the dragon, such 
passions, like pride, are defused and exemplify Harry’s moral reasoning, the 
same reasoning allowing Harry to reconcile with Ron following the first task. 
Further, Harry’s sense of fair play is illustrated when Harry tells Cedric about 
the first task (20.340 –41), personifying his ethical morality, themes not 
necessarily present in Beowulf’s final fight. While Beowulf recognizes his pride 
after the dragon fight, giving  thanks “‘To the everlasting Lord of All, / to the 
King of Glory’” (lines 2794 –95), there is no mending of a friendship, as there is 
between Harry and Ron following the first task.  
While Rowling’s novel inverts Beowulf’s duel sequence, within 
Harry’s dragon task, internalized inversions are also present, specifically related 
to Harry’s and Beowulf’s contrasted character states. Beowulf’s defeat by the 
dragon, as noted, seems foreshad owed by his prideful tendencies. Only by 
dying in battle with the dragon is Beowulf able to purge his pride. While Harry 
battles with pride when entering his battle with the Hungarian Horntail, the 
narrative inverts the Beowulfian model by having Harry not  only come out of 
his trial alive, but also sees him purging his pride through meekness, actualized 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
144  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
in his forgiveness of Ron: “Harry knew Ron was about to apologize and 
suddenly he found he didn’t need to hear it” (20.358). Whereas Beowulf’s pride 
is purged through death, Harry’s pride is released through forgiveness, seeing 
the continued friendship between him and Ron.  
Not only does the novel invert the pride tendency present in Beowulf, 
but it also inverts the timeline of the hero’s age in relation to maturation. Goblet 
of Fire ’s divergence from the Old English epic emphasizes Harry’s expedient 
maturation, as Beowulf faces the dragon after having ruled the Geats “well / For 
fifty winters” (lines 2208 –09). While an exact age is not given by the poet, we 
might assume Beowulf to be around seventy years old at the time of the dragon 
fight, if he fought Grendel around the age of twenty. Beowulf fights his 
penultimate foe after having lived a long life, ruled a nation, and defeated 
numerous foes. Harry, conversely, is about fifty-six years younger than Beowulf 
and lacks refined battle experience, being but a young teenager. The novel’s 
inversion of Harry’s age at the time of his dragon fight suggests Harry’s eminent 
need for maturation, especially when read in parallel with Beowulf. Harry’s 
maturation process, while rushed in comparison with Beowulf’s, is underscored 
by his reliance on others and his willingness to forgive, thematic elements 
brought to bear in light of such inversions from Beowulf. The novel’s linkages 
with the Beowulfian dragon fight within Harry’s first task mythopoetically add 
thematic elements to the narrative, departing from and inverting the Old 
English poem. While Rowling’s themes are original, we can read the Beowulfian 
dragon duel as a conduit for unique moralistic messages within the novel, a 
pattern continued in the Triwizard Tournament’s second task. 
 
THE LAKE 
 While the novel inverses the battles, presenting Beowulf’s last 
challenge with the dragon first in the Triwizard Tournament, Beowulf and Goblet 
of Fire intersect in their second tasks. Beowulf and Harry venture into a mere, an 
undertaking holding visual, symbolic, and thematic allusions and analogues 
between the works. In Beowulf and Goblet of Fire, the heroes’ lakes are linked with 
ice. Hogwarts’s Lake is “a great, iron-gray mass of chilly water” with “dark and 
icy depths” (26.483). Hogwarts’s Lake is dark with “icy depths”; likewise, while 
Beowulf’s mere boils, it has icy associations: “They [Grendel and his mother] 
dwell apart […] / where cold streams / pour down the mountain” (lines 1357, 
1359–60). The poet continues: “a frost -stiffened wood waits and keeps watch / 
above a mere” (lines 1362–63). Icy coldness defines the atmosphere surrounding 
Harry’s and Beowulf’s meres. The lakes exude cold despair, turning away all 
thoughts of hope. 
Another symbolic image links Beowulf with Goblet of Fire : the hart. In 
Beowulf, the poet makes a comparison, showing how terrible the mere is: 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  145 
On its bank, the heather-stepper halts:  
the hart in flight from pursuing hounds  
will turn to face them with firm-set horns  
and die in the wood rather than dive  
beneath its surface. That is no good place. (lines 1368–72) 
 
Robert Emmett Finnegan acknowledges the hart “unnaturally performs a kind 
of suicide” in turning to face the dogs rather than diving into the mere (47). The 
hart, or stag, holds medieval Christological iconographic associations and 
Marcelle Thiébaux observ es the medieval Christ was often depicted as “the 
transpierced stag” (46). But the hart in this scene does not act in a recognizably 
Christ-like manner, as Finnegan acknowledges; fear and suicide are not 
character attributes associated with Christ. However , inclusion of the hart 
within the scene at least recalls Christological iconography, even if the literal 
hart does not perform Christ -like actions. While the hart faces the hounds 
valiantly with “firm-set horns,” it is scared to jump into the mere. Fighti ng the 
hounds represents a lesser terror for the hart than venturing into the mere, 
which “is no good place.” The hart’s inclinations towards the mere are 
contrasted with Beowulf, who “was impatient to be away, and plunged 
suddenly: / without more ado, he dived in the heaving / depths of the lake” 
(lines 1493 –95). Beowulf does what the hart cannot, taking on symbolic 
significance through his juxtaposition with a Christological symbol. While the 
frightened hart’s actions might not completely symbolize attributes linked with 
Christ, Beowulf’s fearlessness and sacrificial action of venturing into the hellish 
mere work in symbolic tandem with the Christological hart image. The hart 
prefigures a more fully realized Christ-like action on Beowulf’s part.  
The hart also holds significance for Harry, as Harry’s Patronus 
(wordplay on “patron,” or saint), is a “silver stag” (31.623). Harry shares his 
Patronus with his late father, James Potter, and Nadine Böhm claims Harry’s 
Patronus demonstrates Harry’s “desir ed presence” of his father (129). In 
addition to Böhm’s observations, Rowling, through medieval iconography, 
associates Harry as a salvific character, possibly even Christ -like. Howard 
Helsinger writes, “Throughout the Middle Ages stags were allegorized in terms 
of the bestiary account emphasizing the legendary antipathy of stags and 
serpents” (164). Harry’s stag Patronus could link him with Christ and prefigure 
his confrontation with Voldemort, the serpent standing in “antipathy” to the 
stag. Harry, following Beowulf’s lead, “pulled off his shoes and socks, […] and 
waded out into the lake” (26.493). Whereas the hart would rather die by the 
hounds, Harry, the stag, willingly ventures into the lake’s depths, fusing the hart 
and Beowulfian imageries into one. Harry is both Beowulf and the Christian hart. 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
146  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 Beowulf’s and Harry’s meres also share associations with burning. The 
Beowulf-poet describes “At night there [at the mere], something uncanny 
happens: / the water burns” (lines 1365 –66). The mere is also a “hot gore / […] 
wallowing up” (lines 1422–23). Similarly, in Hogwarts’s Lake, while cold, Harry 
“felt the skin on his legs searing as though this were fire, not icy water” (26.493). 
When Harry defends himself, “his wand, instead of sending sparks at the 
grindylows, pelted them with what seemed to be a jet of boiling water” (26.496). 
Hogwarts’s Lake parallels the burning mere in Beowulf, but that which hides 
beneath the waters’ depths solidifies links between Rowling’s novel and the Old 
English epic poem.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Beowulf’s mere “was infested / with all kinds of reptiles. There were writhing 
sea-dragons / and monsters slouching on slopes by the cliff” (lines 1425–27). Just 
as Beowulf dives into a monster -infested abyss, similarly Hogwarts’s Lake 
contains creepy creatures. While Harry predominantly encounters merpeople, 
he is also attacked by grindylows: “Harry twisted his body around and saw a 
grindylow, a small, h orned water demon, poking out of the weed, its long 
fingers clutched tightly around Harry’s leg, its poi nted fangs bared” (26.495). 
Aia Hussein notes the name “grindylow” could “be derived from […] Grendel 
[Grendel-grindylow].” While grindylows may or may not link with Grendel’s 
name, the attack on our heroes furthers such connections. The “water demons” 
assault Harry as he goes down to the merpeople’s territory. Creatures also attack 
Beowulf while swimming down to Grendel’s mother’s lair: “a bewildering 
horde / came at him from the depths, droves of sea -beasts / who attacked with 
tusks and tore at his chain -mail / in a ghastly onslaught” (lines 1509 –12). 
Beowulf is assailed underwater and so is Harry: “By the time he had grasped it 
[his wand], two more grindylows had risen out of the weed, had seized handfuls 
of Harry’s robes, and were attempting to drag him down” (26.496). Harry’s 
robes are the Beowu lfian version of chainmail, as the water demons assault 
Harry. Beowulf and Harry are violently broadsided while swimming down into 
watery depths.  
Fig. 1. Grindylows in Hogwarts’s Lake during the second 
task, from the 2005 film adaptation (1:39:49-1:40:20).   
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  147 
These creatures personify Beowulf’s mere and Hogwarts’s Lake as 
hellish. Finnegan notes Beowulf’s mere is presented as “a type of hell” because 
it is Grendel’s and his mother’s lair, “monsters formally aligned with Cain, 
himself a type of devil or Antichri st” (46). 16 Trenton J. McNulty observes 
Hogwarts’s Lake’s “death-connection[.] […][T]he text describes the underwater 
world of the merpeople as a demonic, underworld realm” (57). Richard A. 
Spencer similarly notes a “close parallel” between the second Triwizard Task 
and Aeneas’s journey to the underworld in Book VI of Virgil’s Aeneid (54). Harry 
fights off “water demons” and encounters merpeople with “grayish skin and 
long, wild, dark green hair. Their eyes were yellow, as were their broken teeth” 
(26.497). Beowulf does not battle merpeople but encounters his second monster 
in Grendel’s mother, “that water -witch, / a great mere -wife” (lines 1518 –19).17 
The Old English mere-wīf is used to introduce Grendel’s mother. Wīf, according 
to the Bosworth Toller Anglo -Saxon Dictionary, refers to “a woman” or “a 
female person” (i). 18 Mere in Old English translates to “a mere, lake” (ii); thus, 
mere-wīf can be translated as mere -wife. Beowulf faces a mere -wife and Harry 
confronts merpeople ruled by a “chief merperson, a particularly wild and 
ferocious-looking female” (26.505; emphasis added). Both meres are ruled by 
monstrous, devilish mere-wives, positing the lakes as representations of hell.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These hellish landscapes are the necessary atmospheric backdrops for Beowulf’s 
and Harry’s salvific baptisms. After Beowulf cuts off Grendel’s head (line 1590), 
he returns to the surface bringing with him his “prize, / the mighty load he was 
lugging to the surface” (lines 1625–26). This act cleanses the mere, becoming no 
longer a boiling, infested pool, but a “settled” lake (line 1630). Such cleansing 
 
16 See Fisher 176 –77 and McNamee 197 for further discussions on the mere’s hellish 
landscape in Beowulf. 
17 Liuzza’s translation. 
18 Wīf can also mean “a married woman” or “a wife” (iii). 
Fig. 2. Mermaids in the 2005 film adaptation (1:38:23).   

Mark-Elliot Finley 
148  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
action, for the Christian reader, could invoke baptismal associations, as Beowulf 
surfaces from a newly purged mere with the evidence of a defeated demon. M.B. 
McNamee claims the scene drips with Christian baptismal “liturgical echoes,” 
more familiar to th e Old English audience than to modern readers (196) and 
Finnegan claims the mere’s purging can be read through “[b]aptismal typology 
and liturgy” (47). 19 Not only has Beowulf gone through a spiritual gauntlet in 
the underworld, but he has come back a new man, expelling the demons from 
Hrothgar’s kingdom. Beowulf travels to hell, defeats a demon, and brings back 
proof of the demon’s defeat, performing a baptism for himself and the land.  
Harry follows the same narrative structure in his second task. The 
golden egg’s song states, 
 
We’ve taken what you’ll sorely miss, 
An hour long you’ll have to look, 
And to recover what we took, 
But past an hour—the prospect’s black, 
Too late, it’s gone, it won’t come back. (25.463) 
 
Taking the song seriously, Harry thinks Ron and Gabrielle will die if not saved 
within the hour. While Harry is allowed to rescue Ron, his allotted captive 
friend, Fleur, the Beauxbatons’ champion, was attacked by grindylows and her 
sister, Gabrielle, is l eft without a rescuer. Harry, after attempting to take 
Gabrielle, is confronted with a merperson: “‘You take your own hostage,’ one of 
them said to him. ‘Leave the others . . . ’ ‘No way!’ said Harry furiously[.] […] I 
don’t want them to die either’” (26.499 –500). Harry disobeys the merpeople’s 
commands, grabbing Ron and Gabrielle (26.501). By denying the merpeople’s 
directives, Harry defeats the merpeople in their own realm, like Beowulf did to 
Grendel’s mother, bringing people back from the depths, analogous  to 
Beowulf’s actions, albeit Harry’s friends are alive, contrary to Grendel’s corpse 
head. 
But it is this departure which solidifies Goblet of Fire ’s salvific and 
baptismal symbolism. Harry gives the hostages a new birth as they come to the 
lake’s surface. Even Harry experiences new life. Resurfacing, Harry “gulped it 
[air] down, feeling as though he had never breathed properly before, and 
panting, p ulled Ron and the little girl up with him” (26.502). The air makes 
 
19 While the mere episode can be read as a baptism, Finnegan cautions against reading 
Beowulf as a Christ figure: 
It is one thing to recognize suggestions of baptism here, but quite another to see Beowulf as 
a type of Christ. […] [W]e would agree that a Christian audience might see the hero as a 
type or precursor of Christ. But the abstract is not the poem itself, and the details of the work 
preclude such an easy identification in whole or in part. (47) 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  149 
Harry feel new, as if he was not breathing (or living) quite properly before. It is 
only after Harry ventures into hell and returns with the others that he is truly 
revived and given a new birth. This imagery reflects baptism liturgy and the 
heroic salvific motif of venturing to the underworld. Spencer, comparing Harry 
with Aeneas, notes “the murky worlds of peril and death” show them as 
“saviors […] of their people” (55). McNulty claims Harry’s descent into the 
Chamber of Secrets, wherein he “enters the un derworld and undergoes a 
figurative death before being reborn into the land of the living,” prefigures the 
second Triwizard Task (56). Beowulf and Harry fit the salvific archetype, 
demonstrating what Charles Huttar terms the “principle of voluntary self -
sacrifice on another’s behalf […] tak[ing] the form […] of a descent into the 
underworld, a journey to danger and death, to perform a rescue” (131). 20 
Beowulf acts as a salvific sacrificial figure, in that he destroys Grendel’s mother, 
who represented a threat to Hrothgar’s hall, effectively rescuing the Danish 
society from a devilish villain. However, Harry, in his explicit rescue mission, 
embodies a C hristian expansion upon the Old English exemplar, seeing how 
Harry dives into hell, rescues multiple individuals, and returns with them to the 
surface. Whereas Beowulf emerges with Grendel’s decapitated head, Harry 
surfaces with rescued and revived life in  the figure of Ron and Gabrielle, 
suggesting a Christianized development upon the Beowulfian model. While 
saving the Danes, Beowulf reappears with death, while Harry comes back with 
renewed life for his friends.  
In the second task, Goblet of Fire does not depart significantly from its 
Beowulfian linkages, rather staying consistent with the chronological placement 
of the mere challenge and its symbolic motifs. But in Harry’s third and final 
Triwizard task, I argue Harry’s challenge is a combination of Beowulf’s first and 
third combatants, as Voldemort embodies aspects of Grendel and the dragon 
concurrently. Rowling’s novel follows the Beowulfian duel sequence and inverts 
it simultaneously. 
 
VOLDEMORT AS GRENDEL AND THE DRAGON 
The Triwizard champions’ final challenge, a maze, is a conduit for 
Harry’s true task: his confrontation with the risen Dark Lord. Voldemort’s 
introduction invokes dragon imagery, drawing parallels with Beowulf’s dragon: 
 
 
 
20 Huttar’s analytical context is C.S. Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia. However, following 
Griesinger’s lead, I make connections between Lewis’s “deeper magic” and Harry’s 
actions. See Griesinger 466 –67 for her use of Lewis’s “deeper magic,” self -sacrifice, and 
her incorporation of Huttar’s observations in relation to Rowling’s series.  
Mark-Elliot Finley 
150  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
The thing Wormtail had been carrying had the shape of a crouched 
human child, except that Harry had never seen anything less like a child. 
It was hairless and scaly-looking, a dark, raw, reddish black. Its arms and 
legs were thin and feeble, and its face—no child alive ever had a face like 
that—flat and snakelike, with gleaming red eyes. (32.640) 
 
Voldemort’s physicality recalls snakes, linked with death in Rowling’s  series 
(Berman 53). Wendy Hennequin observes a correlation between Voldemort’s 
action with “his vices: pride, anger, selfishness, arrogance, power hunger, 
sadism, and murder” (75). These traits echo Beowulf’s dragon who “guard[s] 
heathen gold” (line 2276) and “bu rn[s] bright homesteads […] / that scared 
everyone, for the vile sky-winger / would leave nothing alive in his wake” (lines 
2313–15). Due to his snake-like physicality and dragonish character, Kerrie Anne 
Le Lievre claims Voldemort is “the dragon (Latin draco: serpent, dragon) which 
Harry, in his role as defender, must defeat to protect his people” (32). 21 Such 
elements mirror Beowulf’s situation and actions in his final fight against the 
“sky-winger.” Kenneth Sisam observes Beowulf seeks to contain the evil dragon, 
for if the creature escaped, Beowulf’s retainers would be at the dragon’s mercy 
(136). Beowulf and Harry are both working to contain the dragon. While most 
Old English scholars identify Beowulf’s dragon a s explicitly a dragon 22 and 
Voldemort is a man (albeit one who has irreversibly corrupted his soul), 
character and physical linkages open interpretive possibilities for reading 
Voldemort as analogous to Beowulf’s dragon. 
The following is the Old English describing Beowulf and the dragon in 
combat: “Stīð -mōd gestōd   wið stēapne rond / winia bealdor,   ðā se wyrm 
gebēah / snūde tōsomne;   hē on searwum bād” (lines 2566 –68). Heaney 
translates this passage into “Unyielding, the lord [Beowulf] of his people 
loomed / by his tall shield, sure of his ground, / while the serpent looped and 
unleashed itself” (lines 2566 –68; emphasis added). Heaney translates the Old 
English word wyrm to serpent, which, according to the Bosworth Toller Anglo-
Saxon Dictionary, means either “a reptile, [or a] serpent” (i). 23 Obviously, 
Beowulf fights a large, reptilian -like monster, and while the Old English does 
 
21 Dragons and snakes have close literary associations, as Berman observes: “It is important 
to note that even though the term ‘dragon’ is designated by the Latin draco while ‘snake’ 
is designated serpens, in many literary texts and sources the symbolism of ‘serpent,’ 
‘snake,’ and ‘dragon’ are either synonymous or closely related” (45). See Rose 327 for 
discussion on dragons and their mythic connections with snakes and Gibka 146 for 
serpents’ transformation into dragons within medieval literature.  
22 Taylor claims the creature might be a “man-dragon or beast-dragon—Levithan, Python, 
or fire-drake” (229). 
23 Liuzza translates wyrm as worm, but describes the beast as “coiled, burning, [and] 
slithering” (lines 2567, 2569), recalling snake imagery associated with Voldemort.  
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  151 
use the word draca at certain points in the poem to refer particularly to a 
dragon,24 with usages of wyrm, the Old English resists neat closures, refusing to 
delineate the final monster exclusively as a dragon. I do not claim Rowling 
intentionally referenced the Old English in Beowulf when crafting Voldemort; 
however, such a linguistic and literary analogue reveals Harry as a modern 
Beowulf fighting the dragon.  
In Beowulf’s and Harry’s confrontations, there are rounds of fighting. 
Beowulf fights three rounds with the dragon (lines 2542 –91, 2592 –2687, and 
2688–2711), and Sisam notes “Each round represents an attack […] against 
which Beowulf must stand firm, yielding no ground” (136). 25 Beowulf tries 
containing and subduing the dragon, as the creature has proven deadly in its 
attack on Beowulf’s people. In contrast, the novel differs from the dragon 
containment motif, as Goblet of Fire’s narrative crux is Voldemort’s rise to power. 
While Le Lievre claims Harry is crafted as a protector, and a case could be made 
for his efforts to contain Voldemort, as Beowulf attempts in his confrontation, a 
more likely reading acknowledges Harry’s efforts  to survive. His focus, if ever 
on Voldemort’s containment, quickly shifts to surviving a duel with the great 
dark wizard. Beowulf’s primary goal is containing and subduing the dragon, 
effectively preventing the dragon from continued attac ks upon his kingdom, 
whereas Harry’s primary objective is survival. Voldemort is reborn; the cat’s 
already out of the bag. During their fight, Voldemort uses the three 
Unforgiveable Curses, each representing a round in their duel. First, Voldemort 
uses the Cruciatus Curse on Harry (33.657–58), then the Imperius Curse (34.661–
62), and finally the Killing Curse, which Harry defends against with a disarming 
charm (34.663–69). In Beowulf’s and Harry’s final battles, their fights are divided 
into three separate rounds, paralleling Harry’s fight with Beowulf’s dragon 
duel.  
 
24 Draca or variations of the word can be found on lines 892, 1426, 2088, 2211, 2273, 2290, 
2333, 2402, 2549, 2689, 2512, 2825, 3040, and 3131. Interestingly, draca is juxtaposed with 
wyrm in lines 1425–26 and 1429–30: “wyrm-cynnes fela, / sellice sǣ-dracan, […] / on segl-
rāde, / wyrmas ond wil-dēor.” My translation: “Many of wormkind / strange sea-dragons, 
[…] on sailroad serpents and wild animals.” See the Vulgate’s Psalm 73:13–14 for another 
instance of dragons in the sea (sea serpents). My thanks to Dr. Nicole Discenza for 
assistance with the Old English translation and finding additional appearances of draca in 
connection with sea creatures.  
25 It should be acknowledged, contrary to Sisam’s observations, Beowulf does yield ground, 
specifically during the first round with the dragon when his sword fails him: “For the son 
of Ecgtheow, it was no easy thing / to have to give ground like that and go / unwillingly to 
inhabit another home / in a place beyond; so every man must yield / the leasehold of his days” 
(lines 2587–91). 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
152  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Voldemort can be read analogously alongside Beowulf’s dragon and 
also with Grendel, Beowulf’s first combatant. Grendel and Voldemort share 
similarities, particularly in relation to their eyes and darkness. The Beowulf-poet 
describes “a baleful light, / flame more than light, [that] flared from his 
[Grendel’s] eyes” (lines 726 –27). The flame in Grendel’s eyes recalls a red fire 
emanating from his pupils: “while Grendel is alive the baleful glow of his eyes 
in the dark is noticed” (Sisam 133). Similarly, Voldemort has “gleaming red” or 
“livid scarlet eyes” which “gleamed still more brightly through the darkness” 
(32.640, 643, 644). 26 The darkness surrounding Voldemort and Grendel makes 
their eyes piercing, but also characterologically analogous. Alton notes 
Voldemort symbolizes “darkness [and] confusion” and “his name, with volde 
being the Old English word for earth or land and mort the French word for 
death” reinforces such symbolism (218). Voldemort also has a modern Old 
English epithet, “the Dark Lord”, 27 and is embodied by the darkness: “small 
animals […] had met their deaths by a dark shadow that possessed them” 
(33.655). As Voldemort is a “dark shadow,” Grendel is “that dark death-shadow 
/ who lurked and swooped in the long nights / on the misty moors” (lines 160–
62).28 Both villains personify darkness and are “dark death -shadows.” And as 
Beowulf and Grendel have a fair fight, so too do Harry and Voldemort. 
 In his dragon fight, Beowulf exclaims to his retainers “This fight is not 
yours, / nor is it up to any man except me / to measure his strength against the 
monster / or to prove his worth” (lines 2532 –35). Similarly, Voldemort, when 
dueling Harry, tells his Death Eaters, “Do nothing! […] Do nothing unless I 
command you!” (34.664). Rowling crafts an inversion, aligning Voldemort with 
Beowulf, as both characters demonstrate pride, wanting to fight their combatant 
alone. The Beowulf poet also notes, “As long a s either lived, / he was hateful to 
the other” (lines 813 –14) echoing the prophecy in Rowling’s fifth installment: 
“EITHER MUST DIE AT THE HAND OF THE OTHER FOR NEITHER CAN LIVE 
WHILE THE OTHER SURVIVES ” ( Order of the Phoenix 37.841).29 Voldemort’s 
characterological and physical attributes shared with Grendel and the dragon 
illustrate Goblet of Fire ’s fusion of Beowulf’s first and third fight into Harry’s 
third task. The novel also follows and departs from thematic elements 
 
26 See also 33.645–46, 651–52, 656, 658, 34.659, 661, 664–66, and 669 for further instances of 
Voldemort’s red eyes.  
27 For further discussion on “Dark Lord” as a modern fantasy equivalent of an Old English 
epithet, see McDonald 45–50. Davis also connects Grendel and Voldemort with darkness 
(32).  
28 See also lines 86–87 and lines 275–77 for additional instances associating Grendel with 
darkness.  
29 I draw from Davis’s observations of the literary prophetic echoes between Beowulf and 
Order of the Phoenix (42–43). 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  153 
introduced in Beowulf within Harry’s final challenge. Goblet of Fire and Beowulf 
illustrate themes of giving and impending doom in their conclusions. But 
contrary to Beowulf, Rowling, acknowledging the coming war, closes her novel 
with hope.  
 Harry follows Beowulf’s thematic lead by emulating Beowulf’s gift -
giving. Beowulf dies following his fight with the dragon and “give[s] thanks / 
that I behold this treasure here in front of me, / that I have been allowed to leave 
my people / so well endowed on the day I die” ( lines 2795 –98). Joseph E. 
Marshall notes the Beowulf poet highlights “Beowulf’s ideal lordship by 
describing his penchant for dispensing treasure” (4), citing instances where the 
Old English describes Beowulf as “a giver of treasure” (5).30 Marshall claims 
Beowulf’s gift -giving represents a renewed life, as the treasure will allow his 
kingdom “to rebuild”: “Beowulf gives the Geats a chance to survive” (6).  
 Harry becomes a Beowulfian goldgyfan (gold-giver) (line 2652), when 
he “pulled open his trunk and drew out his Triwizard winnings. ‘Take it,’ he 
said, and he thrust the sack into George’s hands” (37.733). Harry selflessly gives 
his thousand Galleons to the Weasley twins as a gift towards the ir 
entrepreneurial enterprise: “You take it, and get inventing. It’s for the joke shop. 
[…] We all could do with a few laughs. I’ve got a feeling we’re going to need 
them more than usual before long” (37.733). Harry as a sicgyfan (treasure-giver) 
(line 2311) stems from the imminent doom facing the wizarding world following 
Voldemort’s return, another thematic echo from Beowulf: 
 
A Geat woman too sang out in grief;  
with hair bound up, she unburdened herself 
of her worst fears, a wild litany 
of nightmare and lament: her nation invaded, 
enemies on the rampage, bodies in piles, 
slavery and abasement. Heaven swallowed the smoke.  
(lines 3150–56) 
 
Goldsmith observes the epic’s ending foreshadows the Geats’ coming doom and 
destined enslavement, receiving “no good from the dragon’s hoard” (“The 
Christian Perspective” 88). Similarly, William Reynolds notes Beowulf’s ending 
includes “the first mention of the Swedish wars,” conflicts which will annihilate 
the Geats following Beowulf’s passing (37). Goblet of Fire  analogously echoes 
Beowulf with a doomful foreboding following Voldemort’s return and the 
 
30 Marshall identifies “ goldgyfan (gold-giver) in line 2652; goldmine (gold-friend) in lines 
2419 and 2584; wilgeofa (will-giver) in line 2900; and sincgyfan (treasure-giver) in line 2311” 
(5). Marshall further claims, “Nowhere does the Beowulf-poet employ an epithet that 
denotes the hero’s tendency to hoard or guard treasure” (5).  
Mark-Elliot Finley 
154  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
promise of war. Dumbledore says at the final feast, “Lord Voldemort’s gift for 
spreading discord and enmity is very great. […] [W]e are all facing dark and 
difficult times” (37.723–24).  
While Voldemort’s return might bring the promise of war, Rowling 
resists concluding her novel in utter despair. Beowulf promises a coming 
catastrophe but Goblet of Fire ends “eucatastrophically.”31 Dumbledore embodies 
a Tolkienian eucatastrophic turn in his encouraging final speech: 
 
[U]nless the few of us who know the truth do not stand united, there is 
no hope for any of us […] we are only as strong as we are united, as weak 
as we are divided. […] We can fight it [Voldemort’s return] only by 
showing an equally strong bond of friendsh ip and trust. Differences of 
habit and language are nothing at all if our aims are identical and our 
hearts are open. (37.723) 
 
Resisting a Beowulfian fate, Goblet of Fire  flips the analogue, extolling hope in 
the novel’s conclusion. Hennequin interprets Rowling’s novels as infusing 
hopeful “reassurance” for her readers, falling in line with the Christian comedic 
tradition where evil doers’ weapons lack power (77). Goblet of Fire  defies the 
doom prefigured by Beowulf, as Rowling situates her novel within the comedic 
fantasy tradition. Brian Attebery notes fantasy tales open with conflict but 
eventually resolve, as dismal elements li ke death and horror “must not be the 
final word” (15). Rowling, unlike the Beowulf poet, refuses to allow death and 
despair the final word in Goblet of Fire. Rather, hope, even in the face of horror, 
embodies Harry’s mythopoetic tale.  
 
CONCLUSION 
Goblet of Fire, when read alongside Beowulf, presents us with sustained 
yet inverted literary echoes from the Old English epic poem. The novel, when 
read from this comparative perspective, transforms Beowulf’s story within 
Harry’s world, as the medieval legend emphasizes the novel’s unique themes 
and illustrates Goblet of Fire  as a work firmly rooted with the mythopoetic 
tradition. This essay, elucidating allusions and analogues present between 
Rowling’s novel and Beowulf, encourages the continued bridging across literary 
histories, between early medieval English literature and modern fantasy. When 
 
31 As Tolkien wrote, a “eucatastrophic tale,” “ however wild its events, however fantastic or 
terrible the adventures, […] can give to the child or man that hears it, when the ‘turn’ comes, a 
catch of the breath, a beat and lifting of the heart, near to (or indeed accompanied by) tears, as 
keen as that given by any form of literary art, and having a peculiar quality” (75–76). 
See Griesinger 462 for discussion of Tolkien’s eucatastrophe and reading Harry Potter as a 
“eucatastrophic tale”; see also Johnston. 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  155 
ancient literature is read alongside modern fiction, the possibilities for 
interpretation, appreciation, and reflection give nourishment to our students’ 
intellectual maturation.  
 As previously noted, I am not the first to put Harry and Beowulf into 
conversation. Margaret Cotter -Lynch sets Alcuin of York’s ninth -century 
argument against reading heroic literature (like Beowulf) next to debates 
surrounding Christianity and Harry Potter: should Christian children be 
allowed to read Rowling’s novels? Cotter -Lynch uses the Beowulf and Harry 
Potter debates as an example for her students to “learn to widen their 
consideration beyond individual texts,” as they discuss the essential use of 
literature in culture and how some of “those uses are contentious.” While my 
analysis focuses on the texts themselves rather than their reception, I follow 
Cotter-Lynch’s lead. Beowulf and Harry Potter come from different time periods 
but putting them in conversation further engages students’ interests and 
appreciation for texts and their cultures. Cotter -Lynch notes such debates hide 
“the covert purpose of investing students in their love for Beowulf as a poem.” 
Inversely, by introducing the Old English poem through Harry’s glasses, 
students might find the “deeper magic” hidden in Beowulf and Harry Potter alike. 
 
 
APPENDIX: CHRISTIAN AND PAGAN ELEMENTS IN BEOWULF AND HARRY POTTER 
Griesinger notes there are those who would burn Rowling’s books “to 
protect children from the Antichrist” (457). While Rowling incorporates 
elements which “are decidedly pagan and even anti -Christian,” Griesinger 
claims Rowling’s narratives uphold “Christi an values and truth” (458). There 
are those deeply critical of Rowling, such as Abanes in his Harry Potter and the 
Bible: The Menace behind the Magick . However, Singer critiques Abanes for 
misquoting the text, causing errant interpretations (25).  
Beowulf has a more complex relationship with paganism and 
Christianity, with Marshall acknowledging the poet’s difficulty in reconciling 
the text’s Christian and pagan elements (1). This paper does not thoroughly 
explore pagan and Christian elements in Beowulf and Harry Potter. However, I 
acknowledge this conversation, while taking a Christian reading of both texts. 
Reynolds observes there are about seventy Christian -like passages in Beowulf, 
with one rebuking “the Danes’ ignorance of the Christian God” (27 ). For more 
on Beowulf and Christianity, see McNamee 191, Niles 5, Goldsmith’s “The 
Christian Perspective in Beowulf,” Whallon’s “The Christianity of ‘Beowulf,’” 
and Irving Jr.’s “Christian and Pagan Elements.” 
Harry Potter has also been read through a Christological lens. Singer 
argues for “clear evidence of Christian morality” throughout the heptalogy, 
claiming the series is structured around the “psychomachia […] translat[ed] 
Mark-Elliot Finley 
156  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
directly as ‘battle of the soul’” (26). While the heptalogy carries Christian 
themes, Singer acknowledges these elements might be hidden through 
Rowling’s “secularized language, setting and characters” (36). While not 
exhaustive, see also Anatol xxiin4, Mi lls 3, Garza, Mohammed, Saxena, 
Johnston, Griesinger, Ciaccio, and  Bell. For Harry as a Messianic figure, see 
Hennequin 67 and Singer 35.  
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Dr. Nicole Discenza for her encouraging guidance through this 
paper’s revision. I am also grateful to the anonymous reader from Mythlore for the helpful 
feedback provided to improve this essay. 
 
 
WORKS CITED 
Abanes, Richard. Harry Potter and the Bible: The Menace Behind the Magick . Horizon 
Books, 2001.  
Alton, Annie Hiebert. “Playing the Genre Game: Generic Fusions of the Harry Potter 
Series.” Critical Perspectives on Harry Potter , edited by Elizabeth E. Heilman, 
Routledge, 2nd ed., 2009, pp. 199–223.  
Anatol, Giselle Liza. “Introduction.” Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays , edited by 
Giselle Liza Anatol, Praeger, 2003, pp. ix–xxv.  
Attebery, Brian. Strategies of Fantasy. Indiana UP, 1992.  
Baker, Peter Stuart. Honour, Exchange and Violence in Beowulf. Boydell & Brewer, 2013.  
Baldick, Chris. A Concise Dictionary of Literary Terms. 2nd ed., Oxford UP, 2001.  
Beckoff, Laurie. “When Harry Pulled a Beowulf.” MuggleNet, 29 Apr. 2018, 
https://www.mugglenet.com/2018/04/when-harry-pulled-a-beowulf/. 
Accessed 1 Nov. 2023.  
Bell, Luke. Baptizing Harry Potter: A Christian Reading of J.K. Rowling. Hidden Spring, 2010.  
Beowulf: A New Verse Translation . Translated and edited by R.M. Liuzza, Broadview 
Press, 2000.  
Beowulf: A New Verse Translation . Translated by Seamus Heaney with facing page 
translation, Old English edited by C.L. Wrenn and W.F. Bolton, Farrar, Straus, 
and Giroux, 2000.  
Berman, Lauren. “Dragons and Serpents in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter Series: Are 
They Evil?” Mythlore, vol. 27, no. 1/2, #103/103, 2008, pp. 45–65.  
Boll, Julia. “Harry Potter’s Archetypal Journey.”  Heroism in Harry Potter , edited by 
Katrin Berndt and Lena Steveker, Ashgate, 2011, pp. 85–104. 
Böhm, Nadine. “Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban (2004), or, How Harry Potter 
Becomes a Hero.” Heroism in the Harry Potter Series, edited by Katrin Berndt and 
Lena Steveker, Ashgate, 2011, pp. 123–38.  
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  157 
Bosworth, Joseph. “mere.” An Anglo -Saxon Dictionary Online , edited by Thomas 
Northcote Toller et al., Faculty of Arts, Charles University, 2014, 
https://bosworthtoller.com/22650. Accessed 1 Nov. 2023. 
—. “wíf.” An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Online , edited by Thomas Northcote Toller et 
al., Faculty of Arts, Charles University, 2014, https://bosworthtoller.com/35587.  
—. “wyrm.” An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Online, edited by Thomas Northcote Toller et 
al., Faculty of Arts, Charles University, 2014, https://bosworthtoller.com/36975 
Cabaniss, Allen. “‘Beowulf’ and the Liturgy.” The Journal of English and Germanic 
Philology, vol. 54, no. 2, Apr. 1955, pp. 195–201.   
Ciaccio, Peter. “Harry Potter and Christian Theology.” Critical Perspectives on Harry 
Potter, edited by Elizabeth E. Heilman, Taylor and Francis, 2008, pp. 33–46. 
Cotter-Lynch, Margaret. “Beowulf, Harry Potter, and Teaching the Uses of Literature.” 
Old English Newsletter, vol. 45, no. 3, 2014, https://www.oenewsletter.org/OEN/ 
archive/45_3/cotterlynch.php.  
Davis, Elizabeth. “The Creature and Voldemort: How Family Dysfunction Forms 
Monsters.” 2011. Texas State University-San Marcos. Master’s Thesis.  
Finnegan, Robert Emmett. “Beowulf at the Mere (and elsewhere).” Mosaic: An 
Interdisciplinary Critical Journal, vol. 11, no. 4, summer 1978, pp. 45–54.  
Fisher, Peter F. “The Trials of the Epic Hero in Beowulf.” PLMA, vol. 73, no. 3, June 
1958, pp. 171–83.  
Garza, Deanna. “Harry Potter and the Enchantments of Literature.” The Alan Review, 
vol. 38, no. 3, summer 2011, https://doi.org/10.21061/alan.v38i3.a.9.  
Gibka, Martyna. “Meet the Dragon: A Brief Study of Dragons in the Harry Potter 
Series and the Inheritance Cycle.” Imaginary Creatures in Medieval and Modern Fantasy 
Literature, edited by Łukasz Neubauer, Wydawnictwo Libron, 2016, pp. 145–58. 
Goldsmith, Margaret E. “The Christian Perspective in Beowulf.” Comparative 
Literature, vol. 14, no. 1, winter 1962, pp. 71–90.  
—. “The Christian Theme of ‘Beowulf.’” Medium Ævum, vol. 29, no. 2, 1960, pp. 81–101.  
Griesinger, Emily. “Harry Potter and the ‘Deeper Magic’: Narrating Hope in Children’s 
Literature.” Christianity and Literature, vol. 51, no. 3, spring 2002, pp. 455–80.  
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. Directed by Mike Newell, Warner Brothers, 2005.  
Helsinger, Howard. “Images on the Beatus Page of some Medieval Psalmers.” The Art 
Bulletin, vol. 53, no. 2, June 1971, pp. 161–76.  
Helterman, Jeffery. “The Archetype Enters History.” ELH, vol. 35, no. 1, Mar. 1968, 
pp. 1–20. 
Hennequin, Wendy M. “ Harry Potter and the Legends of Saints.” Journal of Religion 
and Popular Culture, vol. 25, no. 1, spring 2013, pp. 67–81.  
Hussein, Aia. “Old English, New Influences.” National Endowment for the Humanities, 
11 June 2011, https://www.neh.gov/news/old-english-new-influences. 
Accessed 1 Nov. 2023.  
Huttar, Charles. “C.S. Lewis’s Narnia and the ‘Grand Design.’” The Longing for a 
Form: Essays on the Fiction of C.S. Lewis , edited by Peter J. Schakel, Kent State 
UP, 1977, pp. 119–35.  
Mark-Elliot Finley 
158  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Irving Jr., Edward B. “Christian and Pagan Elements.” A Beowulf Handbook, edited by 
Robert E. Bjork and Jordan E. Niles, Nebraska UP, 1997, pp. 175–92. 
Johnston, Susan. “Harry Potter, Eucatastrophe, and Christian Hope.” Logos: A Journal 
of Catholic Thought and Culture, vol. 14., no. 1, winter 2011, pp. 66–90. 
Jones, Jordan. “A Saintly Epic: Reading Beowulf as Hagiography.” Criterion: A Journal 
of Literary Criticism, vol. 7, no. 2, 2014, pp. 1–8.  
Le Lievre, Kerrie Anne. “Wizards and Wainscots: Generic Structures and Genre 
Themes in the Harry Potter Series.” Mythlore, vol. 24, no. 1, #91, 2003, pp. 25–36.  
Leyerle, John. “Beowulf the Hero and King.” Medium Ævum, vol. 34, no.2, 1965, pp. 
89–102.  
Marshall, Joseph E. “Goldgyfan or Goldwlance : A Christian Apology for Beowulf 
and Treasure.” Studies in Philology, vol. 107, no. 1, winter 2010, pp. 1–24.  
McDonald, Kalan N. Culver. “The Comparative Impact of Old English and Classical 
Language on the Poetics of Modern Fantasy.” 2022. University of Pittsburg h. 
Honors Thesis.  
McNamee, M.B. “‘Beowulf’: An Allegory of Salvation?” The Journal of English and 
Germanic Philology, vol. 59, no. 2, Apr. 1960, pp. 190–207.  
McNulty, Trenton J. “Mirrors to the Underworld.” Mythlore, vol. 40, no. 1, #139, 2021, 
pp. 43–62.  
Mills, Alice. “Archetypes and the Unconscious in Harry Potter and Diana Wynne 
Jones’s Fire and Hemlock and Dogsbody.” Reading Harry Potter: Critical Essays , 
edited by Giselle Liza Anatol, Praeger Publishers, 2003, pp. 3–13.  
Mohammed, Muntadher A. “Christ-Figure Technique in J.K. Rowling’s Harry Potter 
and the Deathly Hallows: A Case Study.” International Journal of Innovation, 
Creativity, and Change, vol. 13, no. 3, 2020, pp. 1141–52. 
Niles, John D. “Introduction: Beowulf, Truth, and Meaning.” A Beowulf Handbook , 
edited by Robert E. Bjork and Jordan E. Niles, Nebraska UP, 1997, pp. 1–12.  
Pharr, Mary. “A Paradox: The Harry Potter Series as Both Epic and Postmodern.” 
Heroism in Harry Potter , edited by Katrin Berndt and Lena Steveker, Ashgate, 
2011, pp. 9–23. 
Reynolds, William. “Heroism in ‘Beowulf’: A Christian Perspective.” Christianity and 
Literature, vol. 27, no. 4, summer 1978, pp. 27–42.  
Rose, Caroline. Giants, Monsters and Dragons: An Encyclopedia of Folklore, Legend and 
Myth. W.W. Norton, 2001. 
Rosser, Manda H. “The Magic of Leadership: An Exploration of Harry Potter and the Goblet 
of Fire.” Advances in Developing Human Resources, vol. 9, no. 2, 2007, pp. 236–50.  
Rowling, J.K. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows. Scholastic Press, 2007.  
—. Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire. Scholastic Press, 2000.  
—. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix. Scholastic Press, 2003.  
Saxena, Vandana. “Growing Up to Save the World: Christ and the Fantasies of 
Boyhood.” Exchange, vol. 42, no. 1, 2013, pp. 68–85. 
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Beowulf 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  159 
Singer, Rita. “Harry Potter and the Battle for the Soul: The Revival of the 
Psychomachia in Secular Fiction.” Heroism in the Harry Potter Series , edited by 
Katrin Berndt and Lena Steveker, Ashgate, 2011, pp. 25–38.  
Sisam, Kenneth. “Beowulf’s Fight with the Dragon.” The Review of English Studies , 
vol. 9, no. 34, May 1958, pp. 129–40.  
Spencer, Richard A. Harry Potter and the Classical World: Greek and Roman Allusions in 
J.K. Rowling’s Modern Epic. McFarland, 2015.  
Taylor, Paul Beekman. “The Dragon’s Treasure in ‘Beowulf.’” Neuphilologische 
Mitteilungen, vol. 98, no. 3, 1997, pp. 229–40.  
The Vulgate Bible, Volume III: The Poetical Books. Edited by Swift Edgar and Angela M. 
Kinney, Harvard UP, 2011.  
Thiébaux, Marcelle. The Stag of Love: The Chase in Medieval Literature. Cornell UP, 1974.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. “On Fairy -stories.” Tolkien On Fairy -stories, Expanded Edition, with 
Commentary and Notes, edited by Verlyn Flieger & Douglas A. Anderson, 
HarperCollins, 2008, pp. 27–84. 
Whallon, William. “The Christianity of ‘Beowulf.’” Modern Philology, vol. 60, no. 2, 
Nov. 1962, pp. 81–94.  
Wilton, David. “What Do We Mean by  Anglo-Saxon? Pre-Conquest to the Present.”  
Journal of English and Germanic Philology, vol. 119, no. 4, Oct. 2020, pp. 425–56.  
 
 
MARK-ELLIOT FINLEY studied secondary English education at the University of 
Tampa and earned his master’s degree in literature from the University of South 
Florida. He is continuing graduate studies at USF, working on his doctorate in 
English literature. Mark -Elliot’s resea rch interests intersect between the Early 
Modern period and modern fantasy Christian literature. 
 
 
 
 

  
 
 
 
Find ordering options for the first in our  
Seminar Proceedings Series at  
https://www.mythsoc.org/oms/oms-03-proceedings.htm  
or read the contents for free at  
https://dc.swosu.edu/mythpro/vol2024/iss1/  
  

  
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  161 
 
 
                     OOK CULTURE AND NARRATIVE IN  
                            MARTIN ’S A SONG OF ICE AND FIRE  
 
                                             MARIA DAMKJÆR  
 
INTRODUCTION 
S THE SECRET TO SURVIVAL HIDDEN IN A BOOK ? If so, what happens if that book 
is imperiled by neglect, war, or simply the passing of time? In many 
contemporary fantasy series, books are included in the worldbuilding as 
significant objects that might (or might not) contain vital information that could 
help save civilization. Equally, books within fantasy worlds might (or might not) 
survive. Many conte mporary fantasy series include a set of fantasies and 
anxieties about books, about information transmission, and about the 
persistence or entropy of know ledge. I call this set of concerns a book culture; 
and the book culture within diegetic fantasy worlds, I argue, reflects current 
questions about the longevity of civilization. In this article, I will discuss George 
R.R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire (1996—) and ask: what do books represent?1 
What other forms of record -keeping and knowledge preservation exist in the 
fantasy world, and why? What are the limitations of the different kinds of 
knowledge transfer, and how does that play into the narrative? Supported by 
book history and theories of knowledge, and with a special focus on narrative 
technique, I will examine the intricacies of book culture in Westerosi society. 
More broadly, I want to posit that contemporary fantasy authors are both 
fascinated by texts, and also troubled by their limite d chance of survival over 
the very long periods that the genre tends to sketch. Deep time is hostile to book 
knowledge, but it is the very loss, or disappearance, of knowledge that poses the 
greatest challenges to fantasy realms. Contemporary fantasy is oc cupied by the 
assumption that knowledge must be sought where it is hidden; that book 
learning is marginalized and dismissed; that there is a scarcity of both books and 
knowledge more generally; but that the ‘hidden truth’ might not, in the end, be 
trustworthy. In short, transmission of information is threatened; and as the thing 
at stake in A Song of Ice and Fire  is nothing less that the survival of human 
civilization, these anxieties speak to contemporary fears about societal 
transience and preservation. 
 
1 Ciacomo Guidici has written an excellent chapter that focuses only on the Game of Thrones 
HBO show, where he argues that writing is symbolically connected to power. Apart from 
one point in my analysis, I will mostly leave the HBO series Game of Thrones (2011–2019) 
out of the discussion. 
I 
Maria Damkjær 
162  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Within each fantasy world, books occupy a social, cultural and 
economic space, but what are the intricacies of that space? Are books privileged, 
or are they marginal? As Nicholas Birns has argued, fantasy might be defined 
by the difficulty with which infor mation is transmitted within its worlds 
(“‘When You Have Read It’” 58).2 Books are often scarce in fantasy worlds, and 
neither messages nor books travel seamlessly or quickly between people. But 
that does not necessarily mean that books are precious: on the contrary, books 
are often ignored, not least by those in power, in Mar tin’s epic series. The 
world’s diegetic readers, those with true appreciation for the delights of the 
library, are invested with a certain underdog quality. Are book people good 
people? What does that mean for extradiegetic readers of fantasy often fiercel y 
committed to reading long book series and, in the age of social media, displaying 
bookcases full of physical books? We expect, for this group of readers especially, 
a certain investment in books as significant objects. What is the appeal for 
contemporary fantasy readers of a literature where books are neglected? More, 
what does that say about our investments in the cultural significance of the 
book? Does the narrative trope that requires characters to recover lost and vital 
knowledge reflect a desire in o ur world to fetishize books, to cast them as 
culturally significant objects?  
In short: how much does the treatment of books within a fantasy series 
reflect metafictionally on the status of books in our own world? As Marie-Laure 
Ryan has pointed out, fantasy literature tends to be immersive, with very little 
breaking of the fourth w all, that classic trait of metafiction (4 –10). Martin’s 
writing in A Song of Ice and Fire  is an exploration of immersion, Joseph Rex 
Young has shown (see for example 74 –77). But metafictionality can be implicit 
or metaphoric, according to Andrea Macrae (18–19). When characters in A Song 
of Ice and Fire  treasure or discard books, I would argue that the narrative is 
implicitly commenting on what it means to be a reader, a book lover, and on 
how books fit into our world. This might mean that our investment in material 
book culture turns out to be nostalgic for a privileged past where, in reality, few 
had access to books; or to fetishize certain kinds of knowledge; or to valorize 
readers because reading is perceived to be under threat in contemporary society. 
The way a fantasy series communicates with its own readers about reading may 
be flattering or consoling or cognitively dissonant. After all, many fantasy series, 
including A Song of Ice and Fire , allow readers to vicariously witness the 
destruction of books and libraries; what appeal does such a literature of loss 
have to contemporary book lovers? 
Epic fantasy as a genre is about the deep impact of past events, often 
long forgotten (Sangster 20). But how do characters in fantasy novels access the 
 
2 As opposed to science fiction, where information is generally easy to transmit. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  163 
past, and how can they trust what they find? The novel form itself is inherently 
about gradual revelation; it orders a set of events but often withholds key 
information from characters or readers. Fantasy novels are sometimes about 
quests, but often they a re also about moving from an incomplete or naive 
understanding of the world to a more complete one. That journey involves 
recovery; of lived experience (a witness who was alive and can attest to past 
events) or of transmitted information (books or other da ta technologies). 
Matthew Sangster points out that “[f]antasy creators of numerous stripes —
makers and remakers of fictions inevitably derived from the languages and 
customs or our world—are fascinated by the processes through which language, 
fantasy and be lief collaborate to define and redefine the parameters of culture 
and imagination” (58). However, from the inception of epic fantasy in J.R.R. 
Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings and associated texts, the possibility of preserving 
the past in written form has been a topic of apprehension. As Vladimir Brljak 
has argued, “Tolkien’s mature fiction is centrally concerned precisely with [the] 
inability of the text to ever take us to that vanished, irretrievable ‘there,’ from 
which even living memory was but the first remove” (6). While Tolkien invested 
himself in a “pseudobibliographical metafictional interface” (6) —the idea that 
the novels are in fact translations of originals written by characters in the story—
Brljak argues that this creates not immersion, but dist ance, between the reader 
and the events. However, as Gergely Nagy has argued, through his elaborate 
metafictional frameworks, Tolkien “represents and creates cultural processes 
and contents in terms of textual activities, by the device of various sorts of texts 
and their interrelations” (642). 3 Tolkien’s interest in the minutiae of textual 
transmission was to persevere in much epic fantasy, and while his deep 
knowledge of bibliography is unique, some authors display sensitivity in how 
they imagine and construct the production, transmission and p reservation (or 
not) of the material book. 
Books are technologies that are underpinned by institutional 
investment of labor and significance. As D.F. McKenzie has pointed out, “[a] 
book is never simply a remarkable object. Like every other technology, it is 
invariably the product of human agency in complex and highly volatile 
contexts” (4). As Eric Hayot lays out in Information: A Reader, there are three basic 
social processes at work around “information”: “storing, organizing, and 
communicating” (Hayot 8). The first process, storing, requires a for m, either 
material or immaterial, in physical matter or in human memory, all of which 
 
3 Birns argues that although Gandalf visits archives to discover the history of the One Ring, 
the hobbits, and therefore also the reader, find history on the road ( Literary Role 9). Peter 
Grybauskas has explored the “untold tales” of Tolkien’s work: “the frames, the edges, 
allusions, lacunae, the borders between story and un-story, gaps and spaces between vast 
Ages and miniscule periods in an ellipsis” (xvii). 
Maria Damkjær 
164  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
require systems, rituals, and investments of time. It will have taken labor and 
resources to put together a library in Westeros. In A Song of Ice and Fire, storage 
happens in libraries that belong to families (for example the Starks) or to 
organizations (the Night’s Watch, the Citadel, the royal library at the Red Keep), 
and which are not publicly accessible. Books denote status, and only a small 
percentage of the population can even read; books are unevenly distributed. 
The book as an object, as a cultural and social thing, speaks to the 
literary world’s deeper assumptions about knowledge, and about the survival 
of information from one age to the next. By extension, this article is also about 
contemporary anxieties about preservation. Since most epic fantasy is concerned 
with long timespans, it is tempting to see the description of books, texts, and 
other transfers of information, as a continual engagement with the inevitability 
of our own civilizational loss, given a larg e enough timescale. How much will 
be lost; how much is lost every day? What if somehow what was lost actually 
held the power to extend or renew a civilization; what if cultural memory was 
somehow the most important thing? There is a tinge of defiant nostalgia in the 
investment in books, storytelling, and scholarship that permeates contemporary 
fantasy literature. Does this nostalgia express a feeling of loss of centrality, a 
marginalization of book learnin g at the expense of technical innovation and 
quick consumption of information? 
 
MANUSCRIPT BOOK CULTURE IN WESTEROS 
Valyrian swords are precious, highly valued, and forged in magic. 
They do not rust or deteriorate, they are difficult to damage or reforge, and they 
give their owners a clear advantage over both mundane and supernatural 
enemies. Valyrian swords embody, in their seemingly incorruptible forms, 
ancient knowledge, now impossible to reconstruct. 
Valyrian scrolls, on the other hand, are almost universally ignored in 
Westeros. A few key book lovers mention them and consider them precious: 
when Tyrion instructs a young septon at Winterfell: “Be gentle with the Valyrian 
scrolls, the parchment is very dry,” he is naming bookish objects that both have 
an incalculable age and great physical fragility (GoT 82). 4 The septon does not 
speak, but seems startled that anyone would care. More often than not, scrolls 
are described as “crumbling” (CoK 385). Valyrian scrolls are exceedingly rare: 
in A Feast for Crows , we learn that “[s]ome of the old Valyrian scrolls down in 
the locked vaults [of the Citadel] were said to be the only surviving copies in the 
world” (16).  When Sam recounts his discoveries in the library of Castle Black—
 
4 In what follows, I will use the following abbreviations: GoT for A Game of Thrones, CoK 
for A Clash of Kings, SoS1 for A Storm of Swords 1, SoS2 for A Storm of Swords 2, FfC for A 
Feast for Crows, DwD1 for A Dance with Dragons 1, DwD2 for A Dance with Dragons 2. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  165 
a scene I will come back to below —he lists off: “works that even the Citadel 
doesn’t have, scrolls from old Valyria, counts of the seasons written by maesters 
dead a thousand years . . . ” (CoK 82). The scrolls from old Valyria form only 
one item on a long list: they represent the oldest surviving book technology, but 
their contents are rarely mentioned. Their survival across four centuries or more 
has not made them central to contemporary culture in the way that swords are. 
Instead, Valyrian scrolls are ba ckground clutter, an elevated form of detritus. 
Unlike the swords, they seemingly have no inherent magic to keep them 
pristine. Both swords and scrolls represent now inaccessible knowledge, 
material survivors from a culture destroyed by catastrophe, but only the scrolls 
are marked narratively as irrelevant. With a few exceptions, nearly all of them 
remain narratively rolled-up, or reduced to crumbling materiality, falling apart 
in characters’ hands. They are signs for information that no one reads, markers 
for the deep past and for the limits of memory.  
Most of the books that are in practical use in the series are in codex 
form. Book culture in The Song of Ice and Fire is a manuscript culture. Among the 
technology that Martin depicts, the printing press is absent. Both parchment and 
paper are mentioned in relation to books and letters, suggesting that both must 
be in use. However, we see no working authors, book -binders, and almost no 
booksellers. There is an oblique reference by Cat of the canals (Arya) to a 
bookseller in Bravos (FfC 572), and Sam sees ou tdoor book stalls and working 
scribes in Oldtown (FfC 767), but those are the only references to book 
commerce. None of the book -loving characters in the series are seen buying a 
book; not even Tyrion, who could afford it. We do not learn where he got his 
wedding present to Joffrey—since it was extremely rare, it would not have been 
from any common bookseller, and might have come from the Casterly Rock 
library, assuming such a thing exists. 
Martin overwhelmingly describes books as “old,” “dusty,” “leather -
bound,” and “heavy.” In Winterfell, Tyrion is reading a “heavy leather-bound” 
book, a “hundred-year-old discourse on the changing of the seasons by a long -
dead maester” (GoT 82). The book Ne d reads that clues him to the inherited 
traits that should be present in all Robert’s children is also “a ponderous tome” 
(GoT 246) with “brittle yellow pages,” with “dusty lists of weddings, births, and 
deaths” (GoT 266). Metonymically, the “ponderous” an d “dusty” hundred -
year-old book bleeds over to the contents as well. Several leather -bound books 
are mentioned in Riverrun, Harrenhal and Castle Black in A Clash of Kings —
castles seem to have books, a sign of inherited wealth and status. Often 
designated as “great leather tomes” (SoS2 160), books are almost always 
associated with physical age, with historical chronicles of events long passed, 
and with irrelevance to most o f the characters. There is no balancing 
proliferation of “new,” “fresh” books, and onl y one light -weight book —King 
Maria Damkjær 
166  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Daeron’s Conquest of Dorne , which is “slender” (SoS1 163), but still old. For 
whatever reason, books are depicted as already -there: persisting, but not 
renewing. It is not a given that Martin intended to portray a dying or already -
dead book culture; it may simply be an omission, within the many, many deeply 
layered depictions of the gradations of Westerosi society, that he shows no 
writers, scriptoria, or book-binders. There are also no scenes of wine-making, in 
spite of the fact that wine is ubiquitous. But it is certain that Martin depicts books 
as already-ancient, often accumulated by older generations or even ignored for 
a century. Tyrion and Sam are the only young book -lovers, and both are 
marginalized. 
I would argue that this is not an oversight from Martin’s side: the 
foundational point about Westeros is that information is sparse, ignored, 
fragmented, and contradictory. A thriving book culture would not necessarily 
counter that, but nevertheless the disregard for book learning is, I would argue, 
a sustained metaphor for misrule and dangerous forgetfulness (see Hunter). 
Book production does make information material, transmissible, and portable. 
Westeros, we might infer, has not invested its resources to wards the material 
instantiation of information. Book culture is described as a long decline, reduced 
to the obsession of a few widely derided book lovers, who live in a book world 
that is left behind by previous generations, but which slowly crumbles as t hey 
turn the pages or unroll the scrolls. The people that populate this story are living 
in history; many of them make history; all of the older main characters have 
participated directly in changing its course. A decade and half before the story 
starts, Robert Baratheon overthrew the Targaryen dynasty and took the throne 
for himself; the story revolves around the uncertain succession after Robert dies. 
For people feeling themselves to be living in active history, the past is irrelevant. 
If a society’s twin  preoccupations are war and winter, it will tend to focus on 
weapons and food, not on books. The aura of books, including their age, is 
suggestive of past ideals that will become increasingly embattled and irrelevant 
as the civil war progresses; Martin is using elegiac book culture to craft the sense 
of an ageing society ill-equipped to handle the challenges to come. 
 
BOOK LOVERS; BOOK INDIFFERENCE; BOOK BURNING 
Sam and Tyrion are the two main book lovers in A Song of Ice and Fire. 
Both are marginalized socially even if they are from privileged backgrounds, 
mainly because neither has the body type or liking for martial prowess, a set of 
skills highly prized in the violence -centric society of Westeros. As pointed out 
by Mikayla Hunter, “there seems to be an inverse relationship within Westerosi 
society between physical ability and academic interest” (48). Books tend to be 
associated with individual characters, rather than institutionalized repositories: 
while Maester Luwin lives in close proximity to Winterfell’s library tower, his 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  167 
solar (study) is crammed with books that seem to speak peculiarly to his 
character: Bran describes Maester Luwin’s “[t]ottering piles of books [that] 
covered tables and chairs” (GoT 711) , his “clutter of books and scrolls and 
bottles” (CoK 399). Similarly, Maester Cressen’s solar at Dragonstone is 
comfortably bookish: Cressen is settled “behind his books and papers” in front 
of “the parchment he’d been reading” (CoK 2, 18). Both maesters are practical 
and versatile scholars, but their relationship with books is foundational to their 
characters: they “cram” books together, they “pile” them up. In other words, 
they are bibliophiles. Books in large numbers have positive connotations. 
Morally suspect maesters, on the other hand, are rarely mentioned in relation to 
book culture: Pycelle’s solar is characterized instead by a meticulous store of 
potions and poisons, as seen by the book lover Tyrion (CoK 239).5 
Characters who align with traditional “heroic” traits tend to be 
indifferent to books. 6 Ned Stark only reluctantly reads the book of lineages by 
Malleon, a “dusty [list] of weddings, births, and deaths” ( GoT 266). Jon Snow, 
as we shall see below, humors Sam’s enthusiasm for the Castle Black library but 
does not take part in it; his mind is on the coming journey north. Mikayla Hunter 
argues that “Jon’s slow -growing appreciation for the value of education is 
central to his character development over the course of the series,” but initially, 
he is less than enthusiastic (49). And while Davos learns to read for duty, after 
he has been named Stannis’s hand, he explicitly rejects reading for pleasure as a 
part of that endeavor. “My lord, perhaps you would like to try a bit of Conquest 
of Dorne as well?’ [Pylos] slid the slender leather -bound book across the table. 
‘King Daeron wrote with an elegant simplicity, and his history is rich with 
blood, battle, and bravery. Your son is quite engrossed” (SoS2 163). Davos rejects 
the idea explicitly because it is too enjoyable: “Davos enjoyed a good story as 
well as any man, but Stannis had not named him Hand for his enjoyment, he 
felt. His first duty was to help his king ru le, and for that he must needs 
understand the words the ravens brought. The best way to learn a thing was to 
do it, he had found; sails and scrolls, it made no matter” (163–64).  
Davos’s rejection of the Conquest of Dorne —the only book to be 
described as thin, and one of the few “engross[ing]” books ever mentioned—has 
immediate narrative consequences, too: the letter he reads for his lesson propels 
the plot forward, leading to Stannis’s decision to travel to the Wall. Ther e is no 
time for the heroic reader. This is mirrored by the trajectory of Rhaegar 
Targaryen. Ser Arys Oakheart (disguised as Arstan Whitebeard), tells Dany that 
 
5 Maesters in general are not seen as a repository of crucial knowledge. Brian Cowlishaw 
argues that “[m]uch of what the maesters “know” is wrong; much that is essential to know, 
they deny, ignore, or mistakenly consider a tale for children” (62). 
6 For the vexed question of the “hero” in A Song of Ice and Fire, see Johnston, “Grief.” 
Maria Damkjær 
168  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Rhaegar as a boy was “bookish to a fault,” but that “one day Prince Rhaegar 
found something in his scrolls that changed him.” Out of the blue, he told the 
master-of-arms that “I will require sword and armor. It seems I must be a 
warrior” (SoS 111). When Rhaegar accepts the call to be a hero, he rejects the call 
of books. Significantly, his epiphany came from scrolls, not books —a hint that 
Rhaegar was consulting ancient knowledge. 
The destruction of books is not a central theme of A Song of Ice and Fire, 
and books are never destroyed to eradicate cultures, to stamp out troublesome 
knowledge, or to punish knowledge communities. Melisandre burns effigies of 
the seven gods, she burns people, and characters express alarm at both of those 
actions, but she nev er burns books. 7 The largest book-burning in the series, by 
volume of destruction, is the fire in the Winterfell library tower, but even that is 
not a deliberate biblioclasm, but a diversion by Bran’s would -be assassin. The 
way it is narrated is markedly distanced, throug h the eyes of a character —
Catelyn—who is not worried about the library, but only about Bran’s safety: 
 
Fire, she thought, and then, Bran! “Help me,” she said urgently, sitting 
up. “Help me with Bran.” Robb did not seem to hear her. “The library 
tower’s on fire,” he said. Catelyn could see the flickering reddish light 
through the open window now. She sagged with relief. Bran was safe. 
The library was across the bailey, there was no way the fire could reach 
them here. “Thank the gods,” she whispere d. Robb looked at her as if 
she’d gone mad. (GoT 125) 
 
The narrative technique here is to let Catelyn, as the focalizer, filter the 
information through her: the fire is far away, and in the face of her real concern, 
Bran’s safety, the fate of the library is immaterial. Both those that set the fire —
the hired assassins—and Catelyn the focalizer, see the fire as incidental to their 
real concerns. The books are collateral damage.8 This ironic distance to an event 
that Martin’s readers might be expected to care about is symptomatic of the 
status of books in the series: people in this world do not always value the same 
(bookish) things that modern readers might care about. 
The only characters who deliberately destroy books are Joffrey —who 
hacks a priceless illuminated chronicle by Maester Kaeth to pieces as a taunt of 
his uncle Tyrion —and Roose Bolton. 9 While Joffrey’s book destruction shows 
 
7 It is possible that this is a function of the relatively late introduction of the central 
religious text of the new religion, The Seven-Pointed Star, into the narrative; it does not 
appear until A Feast for Crows (414). 
8 Larsen interprets the burning of the library as much more significant than I do (48). 
9 Joffrey’s book destruction happens in SoS2 (231–33). 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  169 
him to be petty, drunk on power, and insecure, Roose Bolton’s scene of book 
burning, witnessed by Arya, is more enigmatic:  
 
Roose Bolton was seated by the hearth reading from a thick leather -
bound book as she entered. […] Bolton turned a few more pages with 
his finger, then closed the book and placed it carefully in the fire. He 
watched the flames consume it, pale eyes shining with reflected light. 
The old dry leather went up with a whoosh, and the yellow pages stirred 
as they burned, as if some ghost were reading them. (CoK 810) 
 
The scene is disturbing both because of the measured and dispassionate way 
Bolton burns the book, and because we never learn his reasons. Bolton never 
expresses any opinions that would explain this action, and he does not act like 
a zealot. His book -burning does, however, represent his disregard for 
conventional ethics, and his tendency to allow or perpetrate wanton destruction 
and suffering. His casual decision to partially read a book, and then consign it 
to the flames, also represents the danger that war  poses to books. Presumably 
this book belonged to the Whent family but was left behind when Harrenhal 
was taken. Books, like people, rely on political stability and the protection of 
local lords to survive. Roose Bolton’s book destruction is less a referen ce to 
biblioclasm than it is a representation of the incidental destruction of all forms 
of knowledge when society falls into chaos. It most mirrors, not other book 
burnings, but the fate of the smallfolk of the riverlands, mistreated by successive 
armies from both sides of the conflict. 
 
THE LIBRARY AND THE METADATA  
In A Clash of Kings, Jon finds Sam in the Castle Black library, which at 
first paradoxically seems like a place of bookish plenty: “The air smelled of 
paper and dust and years. Before him, tall wooden shelves rose up into dimness, 
crammed with leather-bound books and bins of ancient scrolls” (CoK 84). It is a 
scene of book abundance, but every step of it reveals that it is tinged with loss. 
The library is a doomed treasure trove: 
 
Sam yawned. “Maester Aemon sent me to find maps for the Lord 
Commander. I never thought . . . Jon, the books, have you ever seen their 
like? There are thousands!” [Jon] gazed about him. “The library at 
Winterfell has more than a hundred. Did you find the maps?” […] 
[Sam] shoved some scrolls aside to reveal a dusty volume bound in 
rotted leather. “This,” he said reverently, “is the account of a journey 
from the Shadow Tower all the way to Lorn Point on the Frozen Shore, 
written by a ranger named Redwyn. It’s  not dated, but he mentions a 
Dorren Stark as King in the North, so it must be from before the 
Maria Damkjær 
170  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Conquest.” […] “There’s more maps. If I had time to search . . . 
everything’s a jumble. I could set it all to order, though, I know I could, 
but it would take time . . . well, years, in truth.” “Mormont wanted those 
maps a little sooner than that.” Jon plucked a scroll from a bin, blew of 
the worst of the dust. A corner flaked off between his fingers as he 
unrolled it. “Look, this one is crumbling,” he said, frowning over the 
faded script. “Be gentle.” Sam came around the table and took the scroll 
from his hands, holding it as if it were a wounded animal. “The 
important books used to be copied over when they needed it. Some of 
the oldest have been copied half a hundred times, probably.” (84–85) 
 
While the books at Castle Black are falling apart, the passage contains 
a more oblique echo of loss: the reader knows that the Winterfell library tower 
was burned in the assassination attempt on Bran. Just at the moment Sam has 
found a huge library, we are  reminded that libraries can burn. But there is a 
more immediate threat. Ultimately, it is not book -burning, but neglect, that is 
the greatest danger to a library. As Matthew Battles has argued,  
 
[b]efore the flames, before theft and censorship, the fate of books is 
bound up in the constant shuffling and transformation of the word in 
all its uses. […] The libraries of Alexandria probably shared a modest 
fate, moldering slowly through the centuries as people grew indifferent 
and even hostile to their contents. […] Ignored by the generations to 
whom they were indecipherable, the scrolls would have been damaged 
by alternating periods of moisture and aridity, eaten by the troublesome 
fauna and flora that have evolved especially to live in the library, stolen, 
lost, and, yes, burned. (31, 32) 
 
The material in Sam’s hands was meant to be “copied over,” i.e. 
integrated into a self -renewing book culture that carried knowledge from one 
material embodiment into the next: in other words, a scriptorium. Sam knows 
that the library used to be maintained by a staff of scribes and copyists, maester 
librarians, cartographers, and chroniclers. The Night’s Watch must once have 
produced, organized, and preserved knowledge, but now, after a century of 
funding cuts, those efforts have stopped. They seem to have l eft no catalogues: 
in this library, as in many other fantastical libraries in literature, Janet Brennan 
Croft’s observation holds true: “we seldom see the use of higher -level finding 
aids like catalogs, indexes, cross -reference lists, and so on. The key to  finding 
anything in the collection seems to exist primarily in the vast memory of the 
person in charge of it —or the good luck, instincts, and perseverance of the 
person doing the digging” (90). We must assume that the maps Sam finds are 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  171 
out of date, but there is no alternative: knowledge production, as well as its 
preservation, has stopped. 
The scene pulls in two directions: it gives us tantalizing glimpses of 
untold detail, but allows Sam no narrative time to explore it: 
 
“I found drawings of the faces in the trees, and a book about the tongue 
of the children of the forest . . . works that even the Citadel doesn’t have, 
scrolls from old Valyria, counts of the seasons written by maesters dead 
a thousand years . . .” (CoK 86) 
 
Sam only has time to give a list; metadata, if you will, only the outline of what 
might be in the archive. The list enumerates both ancient material (Valyrian 
scrolls) and long -forgotten scholarly enquiry (at some point, someone tried to 
record the faces i n the heart trees). Information, in other words, has a deep 
history in the diegetic world, but no narrative future. To modern eyes, the 
“counts of the seasons written by maesters dead a thousand years” look like 
vital environmental data, given the parallel s between the threatening Long 
Night and climate change. 10 This scene represents the promise of answers, 
fullness, and completion, but defers them: Martin holds out the trope of the 
library as “a location for endless discovery,” in Michelle Anjirbag’s formulation, 
but then deliberately disappoints it (80). For the reader, this is a case of deferred 
book gratification. Both Sam and the reader end up feeling what Carolyn 
Steedman has called “archive fever”: 
 
You know you will not finish, that there will be something left unread, 
unnoted, untranscribed. […] Your anxiety is more precise, and more 
prosaic. It’s about PT S2/1/1, which only arrived from the stacks that 
afternoon, which is enormous, and which you will never get through 
tomorrow. (18, emphasis in original) 
 
Sam’s list is about that immediacy of archive fever; instead of the vast and 
amorphous archive, he focuses on the few texts he has had time for. When Jon 
questions the value of a bill for dried cod, Sam exclaims: “You can learn so much 
from ledgers like that, truly you can. It can tell you how many men were in the 
Night’s Watch then, how they lived, what they ate . . . ” (CoK 86). An instinctive 
historian, Sam understands what details mean. But there is never enough time 
in the archive.  
Kristine Larsen has claimed that books, in A Song of Ice and Fire , hold 
the potential to solve the problems facing its main characters: “Sometimes the 
wisdom of the departed is the very thing that will assure our survival, [for 
 
10 Climate allegory is discussed in Di Paolo and Laukkanen. 
Maria Damkjær 
172  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
example] through the transmission of knowledge” (52). We do not know if, in 
the two books still to be published in the series, the answers to the various 
mysteries will be solved by reading books. A Dance with Dragons  sees Sam 
researching the Others and Aemond leaving Jon a book that mentions Azor 
Ahai. The problem is always that the individuals who learn things from books 
are just that: individuals, fragile, and in danger. Sam and Aemond are driven 
disastrously off course on their way to Citadel book heaven; Jon applies the Azor 
Ahai myth only to Stannis and his counterfeit burning sword, and is then 
assassinated by his own sworn brothers. Knowledge needs to be instantiated 
into a person, preferably someone with the power to act on it, before it is useful, 
but those people, in A Song of Ice and Fire, are vulnerable. In the TV series, Jon is 
resurrected and Sam learns of Jon’s Targaryen parentage from a diary held in 
the Citadel, but we do not know if that would be the outcome in Martin’s 
projected final book s, nor whether Sam having that knowledge, or even Bran 
learning it from his tree network, would actually change anything. What is 
certain is that in the book series, books alone are inert, and humans, once they 
have absorbed book knowledge, are vulnerable and often isolated. It is not just 
access to books that is a problem, but whether you understand what you have 
learned, and whether you will live to apply it to your, and the world’s, problems.  
 
CHRONICLES AND THE USE OF HISTORIOGRAPHY 
Book culture in Westeros is undoubtedly modelled on a medieval and 
early modern European template, but it is colored with an implicit but powerful 
impression: in Westeros, those who wield power seem indifferent to the written 
word. The monarchy employs no chroniclers (or at least, they are not 
mentioned), and the culture of history writing seems to have either died out, or 
been enclaved in the Citadel, outside of narrative reach for most of the five 
books. The opening sentence of Fire and Blood tells us about “the maesters of the 
Citadel who keep the histories of Westeros,” suggesting that history writing is 
confined to the ivory tower and not encouraged, funded, or even much noticed 
by the political rulers of King’s Landing. 11 Jaime Lannister writes in the White 
Book, a list of Kingsguard knights and their deeds, which is the only hint we 
have of any written source that references Robert’s Rebellion and the fall of the 
Targaryen dynasty (SoS2 435).12 If historiography is undertaken at the Citadel, it 
still remains absent from the consciousness of the rulers in King’s Landing. 
When history books are mentioned in passing —Tyrion is reading “Beldecar’s 
 
11 The extradiegetic book Fire and Blood, published in 2018, doubles as a diegetic chronicle, 
written by Maester Gyldayn, but its diegetic year of publication is unclear. 
12 The White Book bears echoes of the warrior chronicles of, for example, Jean Froissart. 
See Given-Wilson 99–111. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  173 
History of the Rhoynish Wars” (SoS1 166), for example—their creation is always 
a thing of the past. King Daeron wrote his Conquest of Dorne to celebrate his own 
achievement, and it is a book still discussed for its inaccuracy: it is both called 
“vainglorious” (DwD1 267) and “boastful” (DwD1 346), and in Dorne i t clearly 
rankles that the Young Dragon exaggerated his achievements (FfC 678). The 
book achieved its aim by making Daeron a byword for clever military tactics 
and youthful daring in most of the Seven Kingdoms—but not in Dorne. 
Such propagandistic use of history writing, however, seems to have 
died out. Renly Baratheon, whose brother had taken the throne by force, at one 
point explains how little chronicling or historical legitimacy have played into 
his brother’s rule: 
 
Renly shrugged. “Tell me, what right did my brother Robert ever have 
to the Iron Throne?” He did not wait for an answer. “Oh, there was talk 
of the blood ties between Baratheon and Targaryen, of weddings a 
hundred years past, of second sons and elder daughters. No one but the 
maesters care about any of it. Robert won the throne with his 
warhammer.” (CoK 319) 
 
Renly is making a self -serving point here, because he is himself trying to take 
the throne after Robert’s death. Arguably, since the Baratheon genealogical 
claim was so feeble that it had to resort to “second sons and elder daughters,” 
there was not much point in trying to win the argument that way. But he is not 
wrong about the status of history writing in Westeros. There is no mention of an 
official chronicle of Robert’s Rebellion or of his rule; or of any attempt to 
legitimize his takeover. Aerys’s crimes are everywhere talked about, but we do 
not see them documented or set down for posterity.  
This forms an intriguing contrast to medieval European history. 
Gabrielle Spiegel has described how the French kings used history writing, 
undertaken at the monastery of Saint Denis, to consolidate their power over the 
many semi-independent regions of France, and to streamline their dynastic right 
to rule (209). Chris Given-Wilson, while he argues that overwhelmingly English 
kings did not sponsor history writing between the thirteenth and fifteenth 
centuries, shows how Edward I and John of Gaunt both seemin gly requested 
that monasteries send them chronicles —and monks to explain them —to 
legitimize their rights to (respectively) Scottish overlordship and the English 
throne (Given -Wilson 65, 70, 75). The chronicler Jean Froissart, who was 
employed by Philippa of Hainault, queen to Edward III, wrote extensively of the 
early events of the Wars of the Roses, much of which he lived through, and some 
of which he would have witnessed at her court (Castor 11, 242; Devaux). Later 
in the Wars of the Roses, Yorkist propag anda writers used the chronicle forms 
to argue for Edward IV’s right to rule, and his ascension was supported by 
Maria Damkjær 
174  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
extensive genealogies (Radulescu 406; Alan). As Raluca Radulescu argues, “the 
period of time after Edward IV’s ascent to the throne was characterized by an 
increase in the number of royal pedigrees and chronicles. Edward needed both 
to justify his claim to  the throne and to gather popular support for his future 
military campaigns in order to recover territories in Scotland and France” (407). 
A near -contemporary propaganda account of Edward IV’s exile and return, 
“The Historie of the Arrivall of King Edward IV,” was most likely written by a 
servant in his court (Ross 432–33).  
Edward IV is one of the primary historical models for Robert 
Baratheon, but Robert and those around him seem to have invested no time or 
energy in any such legitimisation of his claim. Past events do matter. At the start 
of A Game of Thrones , the adult characters have lived through violent and 
contentious events, and those events continue to colour their interpretation of 
current events, their motivations, and their actions. They have lived, and are 
living, in history. But that history is nei ther justified by, or committed to, a 
broader tradition of written history. Books are not weapons: only weapons are 
weapons in Westeros. 
 
ORAL CULTURE AND NARRATIVE LOSS 
Like Tolkien’s Middle -earth, Martin’s diegetic world is “a mixture of 
oral and literate cultures” (Lee 51). As Walter Ong has pointed out, “in 
functionally oral cultures the past is not felt as an itemized terrain, peppered 
with verifiable and disputed ‘facts’ or bits of information. It is the domain of the 
ancestors, a resonant source for renewing awareness of present existence, which 
itself is not an itemized terrain either” (97). To write a novel series about oral 
culture is a contradiction in terms, of course: novels participate in written 
culture, and when they portray mechanisms that make the past “resonant” 
through the spoken word, the result is often elegiac. That irony—that the novel 
evokes modes of transmission that cannot realistically be recorded —is alive in 
the narrative fabric of A Song of Ice and Fire . In Martin’s epic series, oral and 
written cultures coexist, but neither seems adequate to maintain a link with past 
knowledge. 
We see the failure of both oral transmission and book culture when 
Lord Commander Mormont realizes that the Others truly exist. He exclaims to 
Sam: 
 
We never knew! But we must have known once. The Night’s Watch has 
forgotten its true purpose, Tarly. You don’t build a wall seven hundred 
feet high to keep savages in skins from stealing women. The Wall was 
made to guard the realms of men . . . and not against other men, which is 
all the wildlings are when you come right down to it. Too many years, 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  175 
Tarly, too many hundreds and thousands of years. We lost sight of the 
true enemy. (SoS1 451) 
 
Mormont here uses a “we” that transcends history: the Night’s Watch 
becomes a chain of guardians somehow charged with remembering; one long 
consciousness capable of “forgetting” its purpose and the threat which it was 
created to fight. Mormont encompasses himself in this “we,” a collapsing of 
generations that were meant to keep memory alive as much as fight a 
supernatural foe. 
The problem is that the objective truth, which we know the Others to 
be, has been relegated to, literally, old wives’ tales, represented by Old Nan. She 
is an easily dismissible figure, being both old and a woman, and one who seems 
to be losing her grasp on the linear progression of time. Bran, a precocious eight-
year-old, is right at the cusp of starting to question her authority. When he 
angrily tells her “I hate your stupid stories,” she reacts calmly: “My stories? No, 
my little lord, not mine. The stories are, before me and after me, before you too” 
(GoT 321). Her timescale is inhuman, but she stands as an instantiation of 
knowledge that goes beyond the individual: “[s]he had lived so long, Mother 
had told him once, that all the Brandon Starks had become one p erson in her 
head” (GoT 231 –32). This collapse of all the different Brandons is not just a 
mirror of Mormont’s enduring “we,” but also of the tree network that Bran will 
eventually access; another form of temporal collapse, but a magical one. In other 
words, what it takes for memory to be kept live is an extra -rational, sometimes 
magical commingling with the past, a state of temporal flux that runs counter to 
the dominant rationalist attitude. As Jessica Walker has argued, “[c]yclical 
history is perha ps the most powerful force in Martin’s series” (81). Old Nan’s 
stories of the Long Night are warnings about its return, but she lives on the 
margins of a world that believes itself to be rational. 
The truth is literally fantastical, but the general tenor of Westerosi 
society is that oral culture is a tale, not truth. Westerosi song culture bears this 
out. Sansa is obsessed with “songs” (always plural in her focalized chapters) that 
weave heroics int o daily life, but lives to learn that the songs are lies. Around 
her, martial society uses songs to pretend the world is more heroic than it is, but 
realists like Sandor Clegane have learned to mistrust the fantasy of the 
enchanted past brought into the gl orious present. Gabrielle M. Spiegel has 
argued that in oral culture, “human action is best understood by comparison 
with the legacy of stories about the past, and the fundamental goal of oral 
recitation is, precisely, to revivify the past and make it live in the present” (184). 
On many levels of Westerosi high society, this remains a comforting lie: bread 
and circuses to keep the masses faithful. For the powerful, the past tends to stay 
Maria Damkjær 
176  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
safely in the past, the dead stay dead, and heroes only come back through 
trickery (as when Renly’s ghost supposedly joins the Battle of the Blackwater).  
On a metafictional level, however, the songs achieve a narrative power: 
they foreshadow and interweave. “The Rains of Castamere” is used to 
foreshadow the Red Wedding; “The Bear and the Maiden Fair” precedes 
Brienne’s violent meeting with a bear in a mêlée  ring; “Hands of Gold,” 
ostensibly a satirical song about Tyrion’s relationship with Shae, becomes a 
prophecy about her murder at his hands. In other words, the knitting together 
of past and present through songs happens ironically, in the narrative structure, 
around a series of characters who do not see their lives as tales, and who have 
mostly learned to distrust the songs. They do not have access to the kinds of 
parallels that the songs metafictionally suggest, until they are smacked in the 
face with them and have to survive (or die). 
This metafictional play with readerly knowledge and character 
skepticism extends to the narrative structure of the first two books. A Game of 
Thrones starts with a prologue focalized by a member of the Night’s Watch who 
sees one of the Others (also known as White Walkers). The chapter ends when 
the Other kills him. In the next chapter, focalized by Bran, the last witness to this 
supernatural attack is beheaded by Ned for desertion. Significantly, Bran hears, 
but quickly forgets, his last words, and they are  not relayed (GoT 12). This loss 
of knowledge symbolizes the inaccessibility of what we readers have seen, but 
characters never will. For the rest of the book, characters continually deny what 
we know to be true, namely that the Others have returned. In ot her words, the 
reader is invited, from the beginning, to mistrust received wisdom and to 
tentatively believe in the “hearth tale” and the myth. The second book, A Clash 
of Kings, starts with a similar metafictional demonstration. Uniquely in the book 
series, the book opens with an event that can be witnessed from all over 
Westeros and Essos: the red comet. But crucially, everyone interprets it to suit 
their own purposes: for some the comet is Lannister red, for some it heralds the 
success of Mormont’s quest  beyond the wall, and so on. As Brian Cowlishaw 
argues of the red comet sequence, Martin “displays consecutive examples of 
how knowledge is contingent at best, or wish fulfilment at worst. […] He 
virtually begs us to nurture doubt in him as a reliable stor yteller” (66). I would 
suggest that what we are being invited to doubt is not necessarily the storyteller, 
but the very idea that there is a place of truth at all. Everyone in Westeros has 
opinions, but the narrative denies us certainty. As Johnston and Ba ttis argue, 
“Martin’s diversity of perspectives reminds us that the game of thrones is also a 
game of knowing, a puzzling chain of views that are sometimes linked, but 
which often fail to make contact at crucial points, just as our own perspective as 
readers cannot possibly hold everything together” (9). These two book openings 
demonstrate, metafictionally, two central tenets about the series’ portrayal of 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  177 
knowledge: accepted truths are wrong, and yet a people so divided will never 
agree, even on things they can see with their own eyes. Oral tradition might 
seem full in Westeros, but is in fact full of breakages, misinterpretations, and 
lies. To the characte rs who populate the world, there are no incontrovertible 
signifiers: no message or symbol that can be read and understood by everyone 
equally. Not even direct experience can coordinate all those diverse perspectives 
into agreement, let alone oral culture or written culture. 
The narrative structure of A Song of Ice and Fire—each chapter focalized 
by a specific character —gives readers access to experiences that are never 
recorded or shared in the diegetic world, and which are constantly leeching out 
of that world with each death of a POV character. The effect of the narrative  
structure is not only that individual perspective is coded as vital, but that it is 
frustratingly and achingly personal. Information is radically dispersed; 
knowledge is fragmented; those who have experienc ed the same events, but 
experienced them very differently, may be scattered across wide distances, 
never to meet and compare their stories. Ned’s death is emblematic of this 
failure: throughout A Game of Thrones, his chapters have revealed aspects of the 
past while tantalizingly shrouding others, since Ned either refuses or is unable 
to fully revisit Lyanna’s death in his mind. The result is that his death not only 
denies Jon knowledge of his parentage, but denie s the reader truth as well. 
Throughout the bo oks, and especially in prologues and epilogues, we hear 
chapters from characters as they are about to die; each time, an individual truth 
is winked out, whether it belongs to a migraine -ridden lesser scion of House 
Frey or the head of a great house. 13 None of the experiences narrated can be 
contained within the book culture or the oral culture of Westeros: no one 
documents those experiences. As Farah Mendlesohn has argued, “[i]mmersive” 
fantasy is “overwhelmingly concerned with the entropy of the world” (61). In 
the case of A Song of Ice and Fire, what is disappearing is individual experience.  
This is symbolized in A Feast for Crows  by the “hedge septons” who 
wander between remote villages. In the eyes of the faith, they are there to bring 
the light of the Seven to the villagers, not to commit them to book culture: they 
neither census-take, register births, deaths, and marriages, or impose any other 
kind of bureaucracy. Septon Meribald, who accompanies Brienne for a while, is 
illiterate, “but he knew a hundred different prayers and could recite long 
passages from The Seven -Pointed Star  from memor y, which was all that was 
required in the villages” (FfC 414). As the High Sparrow intimates to Cercei, his 
own role as hedge septon was simply to bear witness to those lives; lives now 
lost because of war: “I tended to half a hundred little villages too s mall to have 
a septon of their own. I walked from each one to the next, performing marriages, 
 
13 Merrett Frey is executed by the Brotherhood in the epilogue of A Storm of Swords 2 (542–54). 
Maria Damkjær 
178  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
absolving sinners of their sins, naming newborn children” (FfC 473). 14 Hedge 
septons represent narrative attention to the otherwise unnoticed. It is Meribald 
who articulates one of the most evocative themes in A Feast for Crows, the deep 
damage the war has brought to the common people, by explaining the “broken 
men,” herded off to battles they do not understand and then abandoned (FfC 
420). However, such peripatetic septons are themselves vulnerable, and not all 
of them get to King’s Landing alive, as the High Sparrow did. A dwarf septon is 
murdered because Cercei has offered a price for Tyrion’s head; his killers admit 
that “he said he were a sparrow” while also transparently caring not at all 
whether they got the right man or not, as long as they have a chance of a reward 
(FfC 268). Many readers might not even notice that this is probably the kind 
septon Brienne met in Duskendale earlier in A Feast for Crows, who had been the 
only survivor when his monastery was sacked by sellswords (FfC 154). This loss 
of a single individual is nothing in the grand scheme of the slaughter both 
portrayed and implied in the book, but it points to the destruction of networks 
of knowledge within the kingdom. Every organizing princip le and small 
bureaucracy, even as small as a wandering septon, is in danger. The unnamed 
septon’s death is thus not just an individual loss, but a loss of institutional and 
social knowledge. The books even conjure entire voids of experience, 
symbolized by the silent sisters. A religious order which readies dead bodies for 
burial, the silent sisters take a vow of silence (FfC 520). “ The silent sisters do not 
speak to the living , Catelyn remembered dully, but some say they can speak to the 
dead. And how she envied that . . . ” (CoK 518). Their role in A Song of Ice and Fire 
is to represent the unrepresentable experience; the un-communicated life. They 
are information lacunae in a novel series obsessed with giving voice to 
marginalized information.  
 
TREE LIBRARIES AND LOST EXPERIENCE 
Knowledge is personal, limited, restricted, and essentially 
incommunicable; book culture in Westeros seems irrevocably focused on the far 
past. The result is that the books series is elegiac not for a lost golden age, but 
for the knowledge falling away wit h every destroyed village, holdfast, and 
library and with every life lost. As Carolyn Steedman has pointed out, the 
archive is not memory, and the two must not be confused (68). Metafictionally, 
A Song of Ice and Fire is an exploration of the gap between the two. 
It may seem strange to evoke Westerosi book culture only to argue that 
it is a narrative stand-in for failure; and yet, it is through that failure that we see 
how knowledge is conceptualised in the books. What kinds of knowing, 
learning, and “reading” are valuable in this world? What kind of information 
 
14 For a thematic link to the Franciscan order, see Błaszkiewicz. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  179 
can be trusted? When Bran gains access to the tree network, he sees the past 
through his own eyes, but he has access to what Jojen very explicitly describes 
as a substitute for a library: 
 
“A reader lives a thousand lives before he dies,” said Jojen. “The man 
who never reads lives only once. The singers of the forest had no books. 
No ink, no parchment, no written language. Instead they had the trees, 
and the weirwoods above all. When they died, they went into the wood, 
into leaf and limb and root, and the trees remembered. All their songs 
and spells, their histories and prayers, everything they knew about this 
world. Maesters will tell you that the weirwoods are sacred to the old 
gods. The singers believe they are the old gods. When singers die they 
become part of that godhood.” (DwD1 526) 
 
While the book series is fascinated with the mutability of textual transmission 
and memory, it seems in the fifth book to circumvent textuality in favor of a 
privileged magical individual, “reading” the memories of individual 
consciousnesses of the singers. The trees are repositories, seemingly of the “song 
of earth” (DwD1 203, emphasis in the original). The library is a metaphor only, 
since there is “no ink, no parchment, no written language.” It is a metaphor for 
knowledge of the environment, ecoscientia, which is transspecies in that it both 
incorporates singers, humans, and seemingly plants. Personal experience is 
magically subsumed into the memory of the ea rth, suggesting that the 
environment needs Singers to experience (and die), and humans —Brynden the 
three-eyed raven, and now Bran—to access those experiences. But tree memory 
is not a replacement for book culture: rather, I see it as a metaphor for the 
narrative conventions of the novel, a storytelling genre that records both actions 
and thoughts, even those that characters do not have access to. When a person 
dies, their unique perspective also dies out of the world, and it takes literal 
magic, in the form of a transtemporal tree network, to access a faint afterimage 
of their experiences. 
Meanwhile, the physical books are left to gather dust and mites in 
forgotten libraries; in Martin’s unfinished epic, personal experience is more 
immediate, if also more vulnerable, than book culture. The continual emphasis 
on age, on unreadability, on scro lls as stand -ins for inaccessible knowledge 
adrift in time, seems to set books in stark contrast to first -hand experience. But 
in reality, maybe the message is that books must in fact not be neglected—that 
they only become inadequate when they are not used . Inert books must 
themselves be experienced —read and, crucially, actively interpreted —before 
their contents can have an effect on the world. In Martin’s world, book 
knowledge (or any other knowledge) is only useful if it is instantiated in a 
Maria Damkjær 
180  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
person—it only becomes knowledge when it is acquired —but heartbreakingly, 
the people who come to know the truth are vulnerable and unprotected.  
Fantasy literature has often been accused of being inherently 
conservative (McGarry and Ravipinto). And it is true that much fantasy 
literature is riven with sadness for the loss of ages passed. But I believe this 
article has shown that the feeling of loss  is not inevitably coupled with toxic 
nostalgia for a golden age of balance and benign rule, but rather evoked to work 
through complex questions about how the past perserver es into the present. 
Fantasy book series are notoriously long and fantasy readers are assumed to feel 
positive about the concept of the book, no matter whether they themselves 
consume paperbacks, hardbacks, e -books, or audio. Why then does Martin 
continually evoke the frisson of books destroyed or books ignored? My claim is 
that his book series portrays books as residual objects to work through that 
feeling of loss. Anxieties about decline of knowledge are also anxieties about the 
future, and about the flimsy bulwark a library  forms against entropy. Fantasy 
literature as a genre works wit h the interlacings of past and present, the 
messages left behind by those who are no longer alive, and the decay, garbling, 
and possible manipulation of those messages in impermanent, vulnerable 
material forms.  
 
 
WORKS CITED 
Allan, Alison. “Yorkist Propaganda: Pedigree, Prophecy, and the ‘British History’ in 
the Reign of Edward IV.” Patronage, Pedigree, and Power in Later Medieval 
England, edited by Charles Ross, Allan Sutton, 1979, pp. 171–92. 
Anjirbag, Michelle Anya. “‘Endless Wonder’ for Whom?: Adaptation, 
Transformation, and Magical Libraries.” Adaptation 14.1 (2020), pp. 78–95.  
Battles, Matthew. Library: An Unquiet History. W.W. Norton, 2015.  
Birns, Nicholas. The Literary Role of History in the Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien . Taylor and 
Francis, 2023.  
—. “When You Have Read It, It Will Be Destroyed: The Fugitive Archive In Fantasy 
and Science Fiction.” Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction: A 
Gedenkschrift for David D. Oberhelman, edited by Jason Fisher and Janet Brennan 
Croft, Mythopoeic Press, 2022, pp. 55–66. 
Błaszkiewicz, Maria. “The figure of George R.R. Martin’s Septon Meribald and the 
Franciscan legacy.” Memory and Medievalism in George R.R. Martin and Game of 
Thrones: The Keeper of All our Memories, edited by Carolyne Larrington and Anna 
Czarnowus, Bloomsbury, 2022, pp. 80–91. 
Brljak, Vladimir. “The Books of Lost Tales: Tolkien as Metafictionalist.” Tolkien 
Studies 7, 2010, pp. 1–34.  
Castor, Helen, The Eagle and the Hart: The Tragedy of Richard II and Henry IV, Penguin, 
2024. 
Book Culture and Narrative in Martin’s A Song of Fire and Ice 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  181 
Cowlishaw, Brian. “What Maesters Knew: Narrating Knowing.” Mastering the Game 
of Thrones: Essays on George R.R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire, edited by Jes 
Battis and Susan Johnston, McFarland, 2015, pp. 57–69.  
Croft, Janet Brennan. “Is there an Index to the Prophecies? Or, Finding the Needle in 
the Enchanted Haystack.” Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction: 
A Gedenkschrift for David D. Oberhelman , edited by Jason Fisher and Janet 
Brennan Croft, Mythopoeic Press, 2022, pp. 89–108.  
Devaux, Jean. “From the Court of Hainault to the Court of England: The Example of 
Jean Froissart.” War, Government and Power in Late Medieval France , Liverpool 
UP, 2017, pp. 1–20. 
Di Paolo, Marc. Fire and Snow: Climate Fiction from the Inklings to Game of Thrones . 
SUNY P, 2018. 
Given-Wilson, Chris. Chronicles: The Writing of History in Medieval England . 
Hambledon and London, 2004. 
Grybauskas, Peter. A Sense of Tales Untold: Exploring the Edges of Tolkien’s Literary 
Canvas. The Kent State UP, 2021. 
Guidici, Ciacomo. “By Whisper and Raven: Information and Communication in 
Game of Thrones.” Game of Thrones Versus History: Written in Blood , edited by 
Brian A. Pavlac, John Wiley and Sons, 2017, pp. 227–239. 
Hayot, Eric. “An Introduction.” Information: A Reader , edited by Eric Hayot and 
Anatoly Detwyler, Columbia UP, 2021, pp. 1–14.  
Hunter, Mikayla. “The Citadel and the ivory tower: Academia and education in 
Westeros.” Memory and Medievalism in George R.R. Martin and Game of Thrones: 
The Keeper of All Our Memories , edited by Carolyne Larrington and Anna 
Czarnowus, Bloomsbury, 2022, pp. 37–49.  
Johnston, Susan and Jes Battis. “Introduction: On Knowing Nothing.” Mastering the 
Game of Thrones: Essays on George R.R. Martin’s A Song of Ice and Fire, edited by 
Jess Battis and Susan Johnston, McFarland, 2015, pp. 1–14.  
Johnston, Susan. “Grief Poignant as Joy: Dyscatastrophe and Eucatastrophe in A Song 
of Ice and Fire.” Mythlore vol. 31, no. 1/2, #119/120, 2012, pp. 133–54. 
Larsen, Kristine. “‘Books! Best Weapons in the World’: How Libraries Save the World 
in Popular Culture.” Loremasters and Libraries in Fantasy and Science Fiction: A 
Gedenkschrift for David D. Oberhelman, edited by Jason Fisher and Janet Brennan 
Croft, Mythopoeic Press, 2022, pp. 43–54.  
Laukkanen, Markus. “Literalizing Hyperobjects: On (mis)Representing Global 
Warming in A Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones.” Fantasy and Myth in the 
Anthropocene: Imagining Futures and Dreaming Hope in Literature and Media , 
edited by Marek Oziewicz, Brian Attebery and Tereza Dědinová, Bloomsbury, 
2022, pp. 235–245. 
Lee, Stuart D. “Manuscripts: Use and Using.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by 
Stuart D. Lee, John Wiley and Sons, 2nd ed., 2022, pp. 48–64.  
Macrae, Andrea. Discourse Deixis in Metafiction: the Language of Metanarration, 
Metalepsis and Disnarration. Routledge, 2019. 
Maria Damkjær 
182  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Martin, George R.R., A Clash of Kings. HarperCollins, 2011.  
—. A Dance with Dragons, 2 volumes, HarperCollins 2012.  
—. A Feast for Crows. HarperCollins, 2011.  
—. Fire and Blood. HarperCollins, 2018.  
—. A Game of Thrones. HarperCollins, 2011.  
—. A Storm of Swords, 2 volumes, HarperCollins, 2011.  
McGarry, Neil and Daniel Ravipinto. “In the Shadow of the Status Quo: The 
Forgotten in The Lord of the Rings and A Song of Ice and Fire.” Fantasy Literature: 
Challenging Genres, edited by Mark A. Fabrizi, Sense, 2016, pp. 13–26. 
McKenzie, D.F. Bibliography and the Sociology of Texts. Cambridge UP, 2004.  
Mendlesohn, Farah. The Rhetorics of Fantasy. Wesleyan UP, 2008.  
Nagy, Gergely. “Textuality.” J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical 
Assessment, edited by Michael Drout, Routledge, 2007, pp. 642–43.  
Ong, Walter. Orality and Literacy: The Technologizing of the Word , 30 th anniversary 
edition, Routledge, 2012.  
Radulescu, Raluca. “Yorkist Propaganda and “The Chronicle from Rollo to Edward 
IV.” Studies in Philology vol. 100, no. 4, 2003, pp. 401–24.  
Ross, Charles. Edward IV. UP of California, 1974. 
Ryan, Marie-Laure. Narrative as Virtual Reality: Immersion and Interactivity in Literature 
and Electronic Media. Johns Hopkins UP, 2001. 
Sangster, Matthew. An Introduction to Fantasy. Cambridge UP, 2023.  
Spiegel, Gabrielle. The Past as Text: The Theory and Practice of Medieval Historiography. 
Johns Hopkins UP, 1997.  
Steedman, Carolyn. Dust. Manchester UP, 2001.  
Walker, Jessica. “‘Just songs in the end’: Historical Discourses in Shakespeare and 
Martin.” Mastering the Game of Thrones: Essays on George R.R. Martin’s A Song of 
Ice and Fire, edited by Jess Battis and Susan Johnston, McFarland, 2015, pp. 71–
91.  
Young, Joseph Rex. George R.R. Martin and the Fantasy Form. Routledge, 2019. 
 
 
MARIA DAMKJÆR (PhD, Dr.Phil .) is an Associate Professor at the University of 
Copenhagen. She gained her PhD in English Literature at King’s College London. She has 
specialized in Victorian literature, with an interest in the materiality of the text, book 
history, genre, and temporal ity. Damkjær is the author of Time, Domesticity and Print 
Culture in Nineteenth-Century Britain (Palgrave, 2016) and Fiction on the Page in Nineteenth-
Century Magazines (Oxford University Press, 2025). 
 
  

 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  183 
 
 
              HE BRIGHT SWORD AND ITS SHARPNESS :  
                     SWORDS , SYMBOLISM , AND MEDIEVALISM  
                              IN THE LORD OF THE RINGS  
 
                                            GAVIN S. DAVIS  
 
WORDS ARE PARADOXICAL OBJECTS  that hold in tension both aesthetic beauty 
and repulsion. On the one hand, swords project glamor as finely crafted 
objects of self -display and social power, adorning the belts of countless heroic 
figures in history and literature alike. On the other hand, it must be recognized 
that swords are weapons that kill, maim, and injure —a purpose-built tool for 
the morally complex business of homicide. How one goes about resolving this 
paradox has much to say about one’s personal ideology. When discussing the 
ongoing crises in Middle -earth, Faramir offers his own ideology towards war 
and weapons, succinctly summed up with the statement: “I do not love the 
bright sword for its sharpness, nor the arrow for its swiftness, nor the warrior 
for his glory. I love only that which they defend […]”—a statement which is also 
considered to express J.R.R. Tolkien’s own personal attitude towards weapons 
(LotR IV.5.672; Letters 337, #180; Croft, “War” 471). But Faramir is only one 
individual in a world rich with distinct characters , cultures, and swords. What 
can be said about the other cultural attitudes towards swords represented in The 
Lord of the Rings? 
 Tolkien represents the sword as an ideologically loaded object with 
shifting symbolic significance between the cultures of Rohan, Gondor, and 
Hobbits in The Lord of the Rings . These changes in significance produce three 
kinds of medievalism—post-medieval reconstructions of the Middle Ages—that 
each facilitates different postures towards the cultural imagination of the 
medieval world. 1 Through the Rohirrim, Tolkien depicts a medievalism of 
spectacle—an idealized world of valor to be marveled at from the safe distance 
that separates the Secondary World of fantasy from our own. 2 With Gondor, 
 
1 The seminal definition of medievalism provided by Leslie Workman is the “ process of 
creating the Middle Ages” and “the study not of the Middle Ages themselves but of the 
scholars, artists, and writers who […] constructed the idea of the Middle Ages that we 
inherited” (quoted in Utz and Shippey 5, emphasis theirs, and Workman 439). The se 
quotes and their critical context are cited and discussed more thoroughly in Matthews 7. 
For a more thorough discussion of medievalism, see Matthews. 
2 Tolkien uses the terms “Primary World” and “Secondary World” in “On Fairy -stories” 
to distinguish between the Primary World of the reality we experience and the Secondary 
World of sub-created fantasy.  
S 
Gavin Davis 
184  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Tolkien’s medievalism critiques the shortsightedness of a culture that prioritizes 
the sword’s functional utility over the values that would characterize its 
symbolism and govern its justified use. Finally, Hobbits offer a third interaction 
with medievalis m as their characteristic unfamiliarity with swords connects 
their experience with that of the similarly non -medieval reader. By filtering the 
warrior-cultures of Middle -earth through the experiences of Hobbits, The Lord 
of the Rings  closes the space betwe en the Secondary World of fantasy and the 
Primary World of reality, turning the reader’s attention to their own experience 
of the imagined medieval past. Without providing easy answers, The Lord of the 
Rings interlaces contrasting ideological perspectives into a sophisticated 
imagination of the medieval sword that, rather than solving the paradox of the 
sword’s beauty and complexity, subsumes the whole with spectacle, critique, 
and self-reflection. 
 
SWORDS: “USEFUL TOOLS TO THINK WITH” 
 The methodology of this paper combines recent developments in the 
study of swords by cultural historians with theories of medievalism to structure 
our understanding of Tolkien’s substantial contribution to the cultural 
imagination of the medieval sword. Swords are currently enjoying a renaissance 
of scholarly investigation in the fields of archaeology and history which seek to 
uncover the sword’s social functions as a highly symbolic cultural object. While 
such investigation directly relates to the study of swords in medieval literature, 
the same methods contribute to our understanding of the continued, developing 
symbolism of swords in medievalism and in Tolkien’s fantasy. 
Accompanying a new wave of scholarly interest in the study of the 
medieval sword, Kristen Neuschel’s Living by the Sword (2020) reworks the 
structures used to understand swords as culturally significant objects with 
diverse meanings to argue that what swords mean may not be as productive as 
considering how they mean. Neuschel writes, “Objects are not merely the 
product of thought, [sic] they become in turn shapers of thought and of feeling. 
Things, especially certain things, are useful tools to think with, to shape thought, 
habits, behavior—culture, in short. In this way, objects are like texts: they are 
out in the world, detached from the producer, gaining and giving meaning in 
action in the human lifeworld” (9). While Neuschel applies this framework to 
the historical swords of the Middle Ages, the concept of swords as textual objects 
that carry meaning detached from their users also applies to the reimagined 
signification of swords in medievalism. In other words, the systems that 
determine what swords “mean ” have not ceased, but persist in medievalisms 
that perpetuate and reinvent the past. If medievalism is the “process of creating 
the Middle Ages” (Workman, qtd. in Utz and Shippey 5) and swords —icons of 
the Middle Ages in their own right —are useful tools t o think with, then an 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  185 
understanding of the sword in its cultural context provides insight into both the 
culture as well as the nature of that culture’s engagement with the memory of 
the Middle Ages. 
 Using this framework, Tolkien’s engagement with the medieval sword 
(and Tolkien’s medievalisms generally) may be analyzed according to the 
different mechanisms by which Tolkien’s works use, intervene into, and are 
themselves received into the cultural memory of the Middle Ages. First, we can 
attune to the preexisting literary conventions that Tolkien mobilizes to ground 
the swords of his Secondary World in a sense of reality. This kind of study—not 
unlike the early comparative studies that connected the sw ords of Old English 
literature with their archeological counterparts —identifies the connections 
between source material (overwhelmingly medieval, in Tolkien’s case) that are 
invoked in the creation of an author’s symbolic language —in other words, 
“Resonances of Medieval Swords and Sword -lore in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit 
and The Lord of the Rings,” to borrow the subtitle from Whetter and McDonald’s 
substantial contribution to this line of inquiry.3  
Second, we may discern how Tolkien provides his own contribution to 
the cultural imagination of swords through adaptation and original 
representation in his literature. Rather than studying what swords have meant 
historically before Tolkien, this line of i nquiry considers Tolkien’s own 
intervention into the meaning of swords. Whetter and McDonald hint at such 
analysis, noting that swords can mark the transition from the familiar world of 
the hobbits to the adventures of the heroic world (24), but other scholarship has 
explored Tolkien’s contributions more thoroughly, such as Janet Brennan 
Croft’s analysis of Tolkien’s named weapons and Michael Brisbois’s analysis of 
the social significance of swords, represented especially by the semiotics of 
Andúril. 
Third, we may observe how a changing readership accesses Tolkien’s 
intervention from different perspectives. Tolkien’s impact on the modern 
cultural imagination of swords has shifted over time as it shares space with other 
works of medievalism. While The Lord of the Rings  left an indelible impression 
on the development of high-fantasy that is difficult to overstate, it nevertheless 
makes up an increasingly smaller percentage of high -fantasy available to the 
consumer market. Still, many popular medievalisms contain traces (perhaps 
several degrees removed) of Tolkien’s contribution to the popular imagination 
 
3 While Whetter and McDonald offer the most comprehensive study of medieval sword -
culture invoked by Tolkien, see also Beach. For comparative studies between the 
archaeology and literature of early medieval swords, see Davidson 121–28; Brunning 111–
38.  
Gavin Davis 
186  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
of the Middle Ages. Just as the reception of Tolkien’s works has changed over 
time, so has the nature of Tolkien’s contribution to medievalism. 
 To investigate the second and third of these mechanisms, we now turn 
to how three major cultures in The Lord of the Rings —Gondor, Rohan, and the 
Hobbits—each exhibit different ideological priorities towards swords and their 
symbolism, and how these representations shape the nature of The Lord of the 
Rings itself as medievalism. 4 These different representations of swords fit into 
the greater whole of Tolkien’s work by offering a compelling imagination of 
swords as objects of spectacle and criticism that engage directly with our 
contemporary distance from medieval sword culture. 
 
THE ROHIRRIM: SINGING, SWORDS, AND SPECTACLE 
 Nowhere else in Middle -earth are swords more visually striking than 
in Tolkien’s depiction of the Rohirrim. Through their spontaneous use of swords 
as symbols of fealty, their poetry, and their battlefield valor, Rohan’s sword 
culture steeps their weapons in symbolism that enriches their value both to the 
user and to the reader. This culture, drawn from the often tragic warrior cultures 
preserved in Old English poetry, is not without its complexities. However, 
within The Lord of the Rings , Rohan’s sword-wielding warrior culture treats the 
audience to a fantasy of idealized martial valor rendered as spectacle. 
 Central to Rohirric culture is the social work performed by the sword 
as a symbol of fealty between a lord and his warriors, representing both the 
strength of the lord to rule his people as well as the loyal service of the lord’s 
warriors. The chapter “The King of the Golden Hall” demonstrates this symbolic 
work as the narrative moves from the absence of weapons to the dramatic 
presentation of swords, signifying the restoration of Théoden as king and the 
renewal of the Rohirric court. The outset of the cha pter prompts attention to 
weapons as Gandalf counsels his companions against drawing their swords to 
avoid unnecessary suspicion from the wary and warlike people (III.6.507). 
Disarmament increases when the weapons of Legolas, Aragorn, Gimli, and 
Gandalf ar e demanded from them at the doors to Théoden’s hall, marking a 
narrative low -point of anxiety and isolation as would -be allies have their 
weapons removed. This focus on disarmament is contrasted by the subsequent 
 
4 Besides considerations of length, the omission of elves, dwarves, and orcs requires some 
justification: although elvish swords feature prominently in the Lord of the Rings, they are 
most often wielded by non -elvish characters. Moreover, any comprehensive study of 
elvish sword-culture ought to engage with The Silmarillion, and is therefore outside the 
scope of this project. Similarly, dwarvish culture is primarily represented in The Hobbit, 
and even then rarely engages with swords. The relationship of orcs with weapons —
though an intriguing line of inquiry —would require a consideration of Tolkien’s 
metaphysics which is also well beyond the focus of this study.  
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  187 
rearmament of Rohan following the restoration of Théoden to good counsel by 
Gandalf. Notably, it is not the reintroduction of light or hope that finally returns 
Théoden’s strength, but the restoration of a sword to Théoden’s hand by Éomer: 
 
Slowly Théoden stretched forth his hand. As his fingers took the hilt, it 
seemed to the watchers that firmness and strength returned to his thin 
arm. Suddenly he lifted the blade and swung it shimmering and 
whistling in the air. Then he gave a great cry. H is voice rang clear as he 
chanted in the tongue of Rohan a call to arms. 
           Arise now, arise, Riders of Théoden! 
Dire deeds awake, dark is it eastward.  
Let horse be bridled, horn be sounded! 
Forth Eorlingas! 
The guards, thinking that they were summoned, sprang up the stair. 
They looked at their lord in amazement, and then as one man they drew 
their swords and laid them at his feet. ‘Command us!” they said. 
(III.6.517)  
 
Éomer’s spontaneous presentation of his sword to Théoden elicits three major 
effects on both the narrative’s development and our understanding of Rohirric 
sword-culture: first, the symbolic act of accepting a sword from faithful retainer 
renews Théoden and Éomer’s relationship which had been marred by Gríma’s 
influence. Second, Théoden’s personal strength returns to him, signifying his 
renewed agency and authority as a warrior-king. Third, this leads to the sudden 
mustering of the Rohirrim who respond to th eir king’s call to arms by laying 
their own swords at the feet of their lord. This dramatic sequence reveals the 
sword’s centrality to Rohan’s warrior culture which the narrative uses to signify 
the king’s ascendant personal authority and renewed relations hip with his 
retainers.  
An appreciation of the full significance of these dramatic exchanges of 
swords requires an awareness Rohan’s roots in Old English poetry which 
establish the conventions of traditional warrior-culture to which Rohan (mostly) 
adheres. Although Tolkien dismis ses the similarities between Rohan and the 
early medieval English in the appendices to The Lord of the Rings , this note has 
fooled no one, and the close resemblance between Rohan and traditional Old 
English literature is well attested in secondary scholarship.5 A prominent feature 
 
5 “This linguistic procedure [connecting Rohan’s depiction as linguistically similar to Old 
English] does not imply that the Rohirrim closely resembled the ancient English otherwise, 
in culture or art, in weapons or modes of warfare, except in a general way  due to their 
circumstances” ( LotR.App.F.1136n). Major scholarly contributions on the similarities 
between Rohirric culture and Old English literary culture include Shippey 90–97 and 
Gavin Davis 
188  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
in Old English poetry is the relationship between the lord and his thegns (early 
medieval warrior aristocrats), signified by the symbolic exchange of weapons 
and other gifts as the warrior promises fealty and loyal martial service in 
exchange for the lord’ s promise of leadership and protection. Medievalists 
primarily associate this social organization (sometimes called “the heroic code”) 
with earlier, continental warrior cultures which are remembered nostalgically 
in the Old English renditions of Germanic legend, although it occurs as a literary 
phenomenon in other genres as well. 6 In these texts, weapons manifest the 
values of traditional warrior culture by symbolizing the warriors’ oaths of fealty 
and equipping them to perform deeds of valor in fulfillment of those oaths. In 
Beowulf, weapons signify  Beowulf’s renown upon his arrival at Heorot, and 
exchanges of gifts of weapons cement his service to Hrothgar and celebrate 
Beowulf’s accomplishments. The symbolic presentation of a sword reignites a 
blood-feud during the Finnsburh episode contained within  Beowulf, a moment 
which Tolkien compares with precedent from Old Norse literature in which 
swearing on swords was a customary way of making oaths of fealty ( Finn and 
Hengest 133). In the Battle of Finnsburh  fragment, swurdleoma—“the gleam of 
swords”—describes the spectacle of Hengest’s retinue fighting to the death for 
the honor of their slain lord. 7 The Battle of Maldon  and The Battle of Brunanburh  
follow this literary tradition by rendering later Old English kings, lords, and 
warriors in the fashion of legendary figures, depicting them as sword -wielding 
warriors willing to die for their lord, and Tolkien considers the words of 
Beorhtwold from The Battle of Maldon, “Will shall be the sterner, heart the bolder, 
spirit the greater as our strength lessens,” to be the “finest expression of the 
northern heroic ethic.”8 In short, the “heroic code,” symbolized by the exchange 
of swords and their subsequent use, provides a social purpose for the warrior -
heroes of early medieval English literature, establishing the precedent for the 
behavior of the Rohirrim. 
 But despite their similarities in martial culture, at least one major factor 
distinguishes the traditional warrior culture of Old English legend from its 
counterpart in Tolkien’s fantasy: the martial culture of Germanic legend is 
overwhelmingly represente d as tragic. In The Battle of Maldon , nearly all the 
English warriors (and all the ones with honor) are slain by vikings —a pointed 
criticism of the heroic spirit which was discussed by Tolkien in “The 
Homecoming of Beorhtnoth” and his accompanying essays. The Finnsburh 
 
Kightley. Whitt doesn’t deal directly with Rohan but identifies major thematic elements that 
are readily apparent in Rohirric culture. 
6 For more information, see O’Keeffe, Bremmer, and Woolf. 
7 Text and translation from Tolkien, Finn and Hengest 148–49. 
8 “Hige sceal þe heardra, heorte þe cenre, / mod sceal þe mare þe ure maegen lytlað.” Text 
and translation from Tolkien, “The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth” 5, 20. 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  189 
episode is remembered as brutally tragic in both Beowulf and the fragment, and 
Beowulf itself ends with the death of its eponymous hero, leaving his nation 
leaderless and on the brink of war. As symbols of the idealized heroic code, Old 
English weapons are also problematized: Beowulf’s famous swords fail him in 
battle (twice), a return of vi olence is foreshadowed by the recognition of an 
heirloom sword by a rival warrior, and upon Beowulf’s death, a minstrel 
imagines a time when the sound of the harp shall be replaced by “a cold spear 
grasped in the morning” (Beowulf 3021–27). 9 
In stark contrast to the tragic warrior figures of Old English poetry, 
Rohan’s warrior culture juxtaposes the business of swords with mirth, using 
swords to create a spectacular eucatastrophe at the Battle of the Pelennor fields. 
In Tolkien’s lifted prose that moves “The Ride of the Rohirrim” into “The Battle 
of the Pelennor Fields,” Théoden —the once ineffectual old king, bent with age 
and despair—is compared to “a god of old, even as Oromë the Great in the battle 
of the Valar when the world was young,” and  his battle cry is “a sword -day, a 
red day, ere the sun rises!” (V.5.838). Detail and metaphor further elevate the 
actions of the horsemen who express their joy through song as they charge onto 
the fields of the Pelennor: “and they sang as they slew, for t he joy of battle was 
on them, and the sound of their singing that was fair and terrible came even to 
the City” (V.5.838). When the battle turns against the Rohirrim, Éomer defies 
despair with a grim humor, but this defiance turns again to even greater elation 
when hope returns to the battle through the arrival of Aragorn’s host:  
 
These staves he [Éomer] spoke, yet he laughed as he said them. For once 
more lust of battle was on him; and he was still unscathed, and he was 
young, and he was king: the lord of a fell people. And lo! Even as he 
laughed at despair he looked out again on t he black ships, and he lifted 
up his sword to defy them.  
         And then wonder took him, and great joy; and he cast his sword up 
in the sunlight and sang as he caught it. (V.6.847) 
 
Notably, Éomer manifests both defiance and joy in the hope of victory through 
his sword as he raises it against his foes and playfully throws the weapon in his 
exuberance, using the sword to express a full range of emotion. The narrative 
further deepens the association between swords and Rohan’s v alor by likening 
Éowyn to a sword during her great deed of courage: when she cuts down the 
Witch-king, Éowyn is described as a “maiden of the Rohirrim, child of kings, 
slender but as a steel-blade, fair yet terrible” (V.6.842). Finally, the funeral song 
 
9 “Forðon sceall gār wesan / moniġ morgenċeald mundum bewunden” (Therefore shall 
the spear shall be grasped in the grip many a cold morning). Text taken from Fulk, et al.; 
English translation is my own. 
Gavin Davis 
190  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
for Théoden memorializes Rohan’s juxtaposition of joy with the action of swords 
which repeats Éomer’s lines from the battle, cementing the connection between 
Théoden’s victory with the symbolism of the sword (V.6.847):  
 
 Out of doubt, out of dark, to the day’s rising 
he rode singing in the sun, sword unsheathing. 
Hope he rekindled and in hope ended;  
over death, over dread, over doom lifted 
out of loss, out of life, unto long glory. (VI.6.976) 
 
This close association between joy and the sword indicates the ideological 
underpinnings of the sword for the Rohirrim: it is not only a tool of battle, but a 
symbol of a warrior’s promised service to his lord through deeds of valor on the 
battlefield. When the sword is used to accomplish deeds of valor, it provides the 
joy of fulfilled purpose and moral accomplishment, even when martial victory 
is not guaranteed. The catastrophe of the destruction of Gondor is averted by 
the courageous behavior of the Rohi rrim in the face of certain doom, and the 
sudden aversion of that doom creates the ideal circumstances for 
eucatastrophe—the “sudden, joyous ‘turn’” that Tolkien considered the mark of 
a good fairy -story (“On Fairy -stories” 75). Departing from the tragedy and 
gloom traditionally associated with warrior culture in Old English poetry, the 
arrival of singing, sword -wielding warriors marks the climax of Rohan’s 
achievement, creating a spectacle of swords at the pinnacle o f their martial and 
symbolic function. 
Rohan’s sword culture should therefore be considered a medievalism 
of spectacle because its aesthetic beauty is uncompromised, even though the 
narrative context resists a full endorsement of its underlying ideology. Tolkien’s 
recreation of an Old English w arrior culture revives the ancient aesthetic value 
of the sword as a symbol, but despite the glamor of joyous, singing horsemen, 
this image of fantasy is not to be mistaken for a holistic depiction of war or a 
comprehensive peacetime ideology. Following the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, 
Rohan’s warrior culture has little to contribute to the survival of Middle -earth, 
especially since their warlike ideology struggles to maintain relevance during 
the aftermath of the War of the Ring. This is acutely expresse d by Éowyn’s 
struggle to reintegrate to peacetime society following the termination of her 
ability to participate in the War of the Ring. Éowyn’s final renunciation of the 
Rohirrim’s warrior culture has been received as both an indictment of a culture 
that glorifies war as well a somewhat unconvincing change of character 
considering Éowyn’s earnest justification for the necessity of warriors a few 
pages earlier (Dickerson 37–39; Croft, “War” 469). But while The Lord of the Rings 
does contain other more articulate critiques of martial culture that resist full 
endorsement, Rohan’s aesthetic beauty in its moment of accomplishment 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  191 
remains intact: the sword is both fair and terrible. Even Faramir —while 
acknowledging the tragic elements of her martial ethos—declares Éowyn  “high 
and valiant and have yourself won renown that shall not be forgotten,” 
expressing his admiration for her embodiment of the heroic ethic before her 
subsequent change of heart (VI.5.964). In short, Tolkien’s depiction of Rohan’s 
sword culture preserves the sword’s ancient beauty as a symbol of faithfulness 
and valor derived from Old English literature, but localizes this idealization to 
specific narrativ e circumstances. Rohan’s joyful fulfillment of its martial 
purpose by riding to the defense of Gondor forms a moving spectacle, but one 
that is admired from a carefully situated distance between the Primary and 
Secondary Worlds. 
Although the swords of Rohan represent a fantasy drawn from an 
idealization of the medieval past, the surrounding narrative maintains a critical 
distance that preserves the possibility of further nuance to an ideology centered 
on weapons and their use. Éow yn’s interactions with Faramir hint at such 
criticism as she reconciles herself to a world without a need for battlefield 
heroes, but Tolkien’s primary criticism of swords as objects of power comes 
from the other voices and cultures of Middle-earth. 
 
GONDOR: FRACTURED SWORDS AND SHATTERED SYMBOLS  
While the Rohirrim represent an idealization of sword culture with a 
unified symbolic and martial purpose, Gondorian culture at the beginning of 
The Lord of the Rings has a more fractured sense of the sword’s symbolic potential 
that isolates its utility as a weapon from the social symbolism that would govern 
its use. This separation, in addition to Gondor’s excessive emphasis on the need 
for weapons, problematizes the sword as glorious in -and-of itself. This 
separation of the sword’s symbolism from its util ity does not dismiss the need 
for martial victory, but creates the need for the restoration of rightly -ordered 
values—a restoration that comes with the return of Gondor’s rightful king. As a 
representation of a medieval past, Gondor depicts pointed critici sm of warrior 
culture along with Tolkien’s solution in the form of an idealized king. 
The clearest diagnosis of Gondor’s decline comes from Faramir, whose 
comparative analysis of Gondor and Rohan identifies the Gondor’s treatment of 
martial culture as an end in itself as the root of his people’s dwindling status. In 
his telling of the histo ry of Men, Faramir traces differences in cultural values 
that distinguish “the Middle People” of the Rohirrim from the “High” men of 
Númenor and their remnants in Gondor. Between the cultures, Faramir 
considers excessive emphasis on martial valor to be pro blematic when treated 
as a “good in itself,” becoming a kind of crux that distinguishes “Middle” from 
“High”: 
 
Gavin Davis 
192  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Yet now, if the Rohirrim are grown in some ways more like to us, 
enhanced in arts and gentleness, we too have become more like to them, 
and can scarce claim any longer the title High. We are become Middle 
Men, of the Twilight, but with memory of other thin gs. For as the 
Rohirrim do, we now love war and valour as things good in themselves, 
both a sport and an end; and though we still hold that a warrior should 
have more skills and knowledge than only the craft of weapons and 
slaying, we esteem a warrior, non etheless, above men of other crafts. 
Such is the need of our days. (IV.5.679) 
 
In this passage, Faramir expresses the diminished relative status of Gondor 
using the language of weapons. Faramir acknowledges the pragmatic necessity 
of “the craft of weapons and slaying” given the circumstances of wartime, but 
implies the need for other  values beyond martial skill-of-weapons to balance a 
society and govern the appropriate use of those weapons. As put by Matthew 
Dickerson, “Faramir sees the love of war, the practice of war as a sport, and the 
esteeming of the warrior not as signs of the c urrent glory of Gondor, but rather 
as signs of its fall” (60). This separation between a weapon’s martial utility and 
greater purpose is most clearly evident in Faramir’s previously quoted 
statement, “I do not love the bright sword for its sharpness, nor the arrow for its 
swiftness, nor the warrior for his glory. I love only that which they defend,” 
which orients the moral justification for the weapon’s use around the object of 
defense (IV.5.672). By calling the sword “bright,” Faramir seems to acknowledge 
the aesthetic beauty in an object so strongly associated with valor. But the value 
of the sword’s sharpness—the quality which turns the sword from a symbol to 
a weapon—is contingent upon the object of the sword’s use. Divorced from a 
clear sense of moral purpose, Faramir has little love for the sword.  
Despite his sophisticated personal ideology, Faramir is an outlier in the 
struggling kingdom of Gondor that is consumed by the pragmatic need for 
weapons in its fight for survival. Boromir, rather, is considered a paragon of 
Gondor’s martial culture, but B oromir is nevertheless enamored by the Ring’s 
martial potential, providing further evidence of the moral decline at the heart of 
Gondor’s martial culture. At the Council of Elrond, Boromir makes his case for 
the need of weapons: “The Men of Gondor are vali ant, and they will never 
submit; but they may be beaten down. Valour needs first strength, and then a 
weapon. Let the Ring be your weapon, if it has such power as you say. Take it 
and go forth to victory!” (II.2.267). When Elrond rejects such an idea based  on 
the Ring’s power to corrupt the heart, Boromir relents with deep reluctance, 
saying “Then in Gondor we must trust to such weapons as we have” (II.2.267 –
68). Boromir’s reasoning builds on the premise that the only thing preventing 
Gondor from victory ag ainst Sauron is the magnitude of Gondor’s power, 
represented here by the potency of their weapons. Boromir fails to see in this 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  193 
instance that might —be it valor or a potent weapon —may make for martial 
victory, but not the moral victory that those gathered at the Council of Elrond 
are seeking. This desire for weapons and power is explicitly connected to 
Boromir’s tragic fall as it ar ises again in the midst of Boromir’s final assault on 
Frodo: “[H]is talk dwelt on walls and weapons, and the mustering of men; and 
he drew plans for great alliances and glorious victories to be; and he cast down 
Mordor, and became himself a mighty king, be nevolent and wise” (II.10.398). 
As described by Dickerson, Boromir’s obsession with military victory and his 
assault on Frodo makes a worldview that glorifies war complicit in the 
subsequent breaking of the fellowship (60 –62). While Rohan’s spectacular 
military victory will later be convenient for the survival of Minas Tirith, 
Boromir’s neglect of the moral frameworks that would constrain the use of 
weapons results in his inability to comprehend the moral danger posed by the 
Ring of Power.  
Gondor’s disconnect between weapons and the morality that would 
govern their use manifests in the fractured symbolism of the sword. While fealty 
and service characterize the symbolic and martial work of Rohan’s swords, a 
comparison of Merry’s and Pippin’s respective declarations of fealty to Théoden 
and Denethor reveals the diminished symbolic weight of Gondor’s swords. 
Merry’s oath of fealty to Théoden is informal, simple, and sincere: Merry asks if 
he may lay his sword as on Théoden’s lap as token of his service, having been 
prompted by a sudden love for the old king. Théoden accepts, bids Merry rise 
an esquire of Rohan, and commands him to take his sword and bear it to good 
fortune (V.2.777). While informal, Merry’s attitude matches the spontaneity of 
the other, earlier symbolic exchanges of weapons between Théoden and his 
retinue, and the simple promise and the exchange of the sword is sufficient 
symbolism to convey the earnestness of the relationship. In contrast, coldness 
marks Pippin’s declaration of f ealty to Denethor, and the sword’s isolated 
martial function diminishes the symbolic weight of the sword during Pippin’s 
ritual of fealty. When he offers Denethor his sword, Denethor says, “Give me 
the weapon!” and proceeds to question Pippin on its provenance. That Denethor 
calls it a weapon rather than a sword distills the object’s value to its use on the 
battlefield, stripping the sword’s procurement of the fealty, loyalty, and service 
that the weapon’s exchange could otherwise suggest (V.5.756). When Pi ppin 
formally swears his service, the sword is symbolically placed on Denethor’s lap 
and Pippen takes the hilt, but must swear a host of additional oaths and 
assurances since, in contrast to Merry’s exchange of oaths, the sword alone is 
not a sufficient sy mbol of their exchange. The sword, distilled to its martial 
utility, has limited social symbolism and must be supplemented by additional 
assurances. 
Gavin Davis 
194  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 Aragorn’s return as the rightful king of Gondor and bearer of the 
Sword Reforged resolves both Gondor’s need for weapons as well as its cultural 
crisis by symbolically restoring martial valor to its appropriate place. Aragorn 
pragmatically rescues Gondor from its immediate crisis by leading the 
Dúnedain of the North, the sons of Elrond, and a coalition of the southern 
fiefdoms to lift the siege of Minas Tirith. While doing so, the narrative displays 
Aragorn’s martial prowess in its fullness as he wields his famous sword with its 
deep provenance: “the Flame of the West, Andúril like a new fire kindled, Narsil 
re-forged as deadly as of old” (V.6.848). But more significant than the practical 
use of Aragorn’s famous weapon is the identity of its wielder that th e sword 
represents. As demonstrated by Michael Brisbois, Aragorn, as bearer of the 
heirloom sword of Elendil that was broken and reforged, becomes with his 
sword a symbol of the millennial renewal brought about by the return of the 
king (Brisbois 98). Bris bois’s analysis provides a more thorough reading of the 
semiotic significance of Andúril than can be supplied here. But while avoiding 
a full repetition of Bribois’s argument, it is worth reiterating both the importance 
of Andúril to Aragorn’s identity as well as the distinct limitations of Andúril’s 
significance. Andúril is a recurrent symbol of Aragorn’s kingly heritage and the 
martial strength he uses to rescue his kingdom from the forces of evil. However, 
Andúril is not the final sign that proves Aragor n’s legitimacy. Rather, it is 
Aragorn’s role as a healer that identifies him as the rightful heir to the throne of 
Gondor (Bribois 100–01). Aragorn’s martial identity as the bearer of Andúril and 
Savior of Gondor is subservient to his primary identities as  “the Elfstone” and 
“the Renewer” (V.8.863). The unnamed Warden of the houses of healing marvels 
at the complexity of this individual and struggles to comprehend how one so 
skilled in swords could also be a healer (VI.5.958), but by demonstrating his 
healing skills as “a lore-master, not merely a captain of war,” Aragorn validates 
his identity as the Renewer, suitable to lead the kingdom to a time of peace 
(V.8.865). Aragorn’s coronation ultimately represents these reordered values 
when his many titles are listed out in increasing significance: “Here is Aragorn 
son of Arathorn, […] bearer of the Star of the North, wielder of the Sword 
Reforged, victorious in battle, whose hands bring healing, the Elfstone, Elessar 
of the line of Valandil, Isildur’s son, Elen dil’s son of Númenor” (VI.5.967). In 
Gondor under the rule of Aragorn, swords retain their practical use, but their 
moral framework is restored by the return of a king whose symbolism submits 
the martial function of swords to the governing values of restor ation and 
renewal.  
Gondor’s medievalism functions differently from Rohan’s because 
Gondor’s redemptive arc represents, in a way, Tolkien’s attempt to “fix” a fault 
he recognizes in medieval literary warrior cultures. Brisbois’s study of 
Aragorn’s relationship with his sword notes Aragorn’s significant departure 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  195 
from earlier medieval models that would have emphasized the military 
authority of a king, a difference which underscores the magnitude of the 
medievalism’s intervention into the historical past (Brisbois 99 –101). Tolkien is 
well aware of the suffering asso ciated with warfare and the self -destructive 
tendencies of chivalric culture —issues he addresses directly with “The 
Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm’s Son,” which have been studied in 
Tolkien scholarship. 10 Many of Tolkien’s criticisms of warfare are associated 
with the increasing separation between commanders and the location of battle, 
and Tolkien consistently saw the increasing mechanization of warfare as 
morally perilous to those who would attempt to use  such depersonalized 
devices as airplanes or atomic bombs. 11 But unlike Rohan’s spectacle in which 
the ideological problems of weapons are momentarily deferred by the narrative 
context, Gondorian sword-culture represents the hollow moral justification for 
weapons that are valued for their power, and the futility of valor pursued for its 
own sake, personified in the tragic figure of Boromir. Tolkien’s medievalism 
reproduces the moral hazards of weapons which are found in medieval world 
and modernity alike, but Tolkien intervenes through the figure of an idealized 
king (and foreshadowed by the ideological musings of Faramir) who 
subordinates the practical necessities of weapons to the superior values that 
would govern their justified use, thereby creating a medievalism that aspires to 
what could have been.  
 
HOBBITS: SWORDS IN A SWORDLESS CULTURE 
 In a manner analogous to our own, largely swordless modern times, 
the swordless -ness of Hobbit culture starkly contrasts the martial cultures of 
Rohan and Gondor. Hobbits, as noted by Tom Shippey, are an intermediary 
between the modern reader and the fict ional medievalism of Middle -earth, 
helping to bridge the distance between the two worlds by representing modern 
interests in the unfamiliar world of medievalist fantasy (6 –7). Whetter and 
McDonald incorporate the symbolism of swords into Shippey’s argument , 
observing that “swords serve as a bridge between the hobbits and the heroic 
world and heroism,” functioning as a semiotic marker for the transfer of the 
hobbits from the familiar world to the world of adventure (Whetter and 
McDonald 24 –25). But this obse rvation, made in passing in Whetter and 
McDonald’s article, is worthy of closer attention due to the essential contribution 
of Hobbit culture’s swordless -ness to the overall function of The Lord of the 
Rings’s medievalism. The swordless Hobbit culture prov ides an in -world 
representation of our familiar, modern world which the hobbits leave and return 
 
10 See Reinhard. 
11 See Croft, War 100–04; Tolkien, Letters 168, #101. 
Gavin Davis 
196  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
to, but just as the hobbits each return changed from their journey, so too has 
their estimation of the sword. These changed perspectives on the sword are not 
uniform across the experience of the hobbits, but all contribute to the hobbits’ 
collective ability to successfully recover the Shire from corruption with minimal 
casualties or moral loss. In this manner, the return of swords to the Shire brought 
by the hobbits becomes an in -world manifestation of medievalism —relics of a 
medieval past reconfigured and deployed to a moment defined by the present. 
In so doing, the hobbits’ experience with swords reflects the reader’s experience 
with the medievalism of the perilous realm, providing a morally resonant 
interface between the primary world and an imagined, medieval experience.  
 Technically, swords were likely present in the Shire by the time of 
Bilbo’s 111th birthday, although the distance between the sword’s martial utility 
and its present existence illustrates the object’s change in meaning from that of 
a weapon to that of an object of memory. In the foreword to the second edition 
(appearing for the first time in 1966), Tolkien writes: 
 
At no time had Hobbits of any kind been warlike, and they had never 
fought among themselves. In olden days they had, of course, been often 
obliged to fight to maintain themselves in a hard world; but in Bilbo's 
time that was very ancient history. […] So, t hough there was still some 
store of weapons in the Shire, these were used mostly as trophies, 
hanging above hearths or on walls, or gathered into the museum at 
Michel Delving. The Mathom -house it was called; for anything that 
Hobbits had no immediate use f or, but were unwilling to throw away, 
they called a mathom. (LotR Prologue.5) 
 
This insight into Hobbit hoarding habits suggests that the nature of the sword -
object had shifted for Hobbits by the time of the War of the Ring. Unlike the 
swords of the Rohirrim which are rich with their symbolism of fealty and 
service, or the weapons ne eded by Gondor in their desperate hour, the swords 
of Hobbit culture have become trophies, objects of memory with latent utility, 
having been transformed in essence and in function to the status of meaningful 
wall décor. This fundamental change from weapon to something else is signaled 
linguistically by the reintroduction of the word, mathom, which is a resurrection 
of the defunct Old English word máðum, which carried the meaning of “a 
precious or valuable thing (often refers to gifts), a treasure, jewel, ornament” 
(Bosworth). This object is still “a useful tool to think with,” but the nature of the 
object is only tangentially related to the similar obje cts born by the warriors of 
Gondor and Rohan. The transformation of the Shire’s swords from weapons to 
mathoms is so complete that they are wholly absent from the inventory of 
weapons gathered by the hobbits in their fight against Sharkey’s ruffians 
(VI.8.1008–09). It could be argued that the list of improvised farm-tool weapons 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  197 
used by the hobbits represents the “some store of weapons” referenced in the 
prologue, but this is unlikely since the tools have too much pragmatic, non -
weapon value to be wall décor or put away in a museum. It is more plausible 
that the swords were hidden in plain sight, or simply didn’t come to mind when 
the need for weapons arose. Such is the extent of the hobbits’ peaceful, pastoral 
existence at the time of the War of the Ring that a dedicated weapon of war 
cannot readily be found amongst them, and the mere appearance of swords in 
the hands of the four hobbits is enough to break the ranks of the ruffians when 
they first (nearly) come to blows (VI.8.1005). 
 The journeys of Frodo, Sam, Merry, and Pippin further illustrate the 
unfamiliarity of Hobbits with swords as they are represented as both 
inexperienced and unglamorous in their handling of swords. The four hobbits 
set out for Bree without weapons, and are  only supplied with the mysterious 
swords of the Barrow-downs by Tom Bombadil following their near catastrophe 
with the Barrow-wights. Even then, the need for these strange objects surprises 
the hobbits: “Their new weapons they hung on leather belts under their jackets, 
feeling them very awkward, and wondering if they would be of any use. 
Fighting had not before occurred to any of them as one of the adventures in 
which their flight would land them” (I.8.146). Bilbo, perhaps the most 
experienced Hobbit with swords, stores his sword in a box which he “fumbles” 
through to find Sting, which he presents to Frodo by rather indelicately stabbing 
it into a nearby beam. 12 Frodo and Sam “fumble for their sword hilts” when 
threatened by Faramir’s host, and although Sam is able to make effective use of 
his sword against Shelob and Gollum, this is due more to the intensity of his 
fury than any latent skill he had with the blade (IV.5.681, IV.9.726–27, IV.10.728–
29).  
The hobbits’ unfamiliarity with swords sharply contrasts the heroic, 
Old English aesthetics of Rohan and the war-weary chivalric culture of Gondor, 
but this unfamiliarity reproduces the reader’s own interface with the world of 
medievalism. Like Hobbit cult ure as described in the prologue, the swords of 
today are largely alien objects—they are invoked in stories and sometimes used 
as decor, and only some sub-cultures use modified swords in sport or recreation. 
For us, as for Hobbits, swords have no immediate  use, and hundreds of years 
separate the present from the last time swords played a significant role on a 
battlefield. The use of swords in war is a distant memory, turning the bladed 
weapons into a relic of the medieval past invoked in medievalism. For th e 
hobbits, as for us, swords have become useful objects to think with, arming the 
 
12 The literary significance of this “sword in the stone” moment is discussed by Flieger. 
Despite the moment’s literary significance in signaling “the emergence of the hero,” it still 
demonstrates the awkwardness of the hobbits’ relationship with swords (Flieger 55, 48). 
Gavin Davis 
198  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
characters of our medieval fantasies and sometimes decorating our walls, even 
if their martial purpose has long since disappeared. 
Representing modern attitudes towards swords through the hobbits 
changes the mechanism of the medievalism by shifting focus onto the audience’s 
own engagement with the Secondary World. Instead of looking directly at an 
imagined Middle Ages where the use of  swords is glamorized or the problems 
of chivalry are addressed, readers look at versions of themselves interacting 
with the medieval world as the hobbits filter through the cultures of Middle -
earth. By reflecting the reader’s own experience of medievalism  through its 
adventurers, The Lord of the Rings  narrows the distance between the imagined 
medieval world and the characters with which readers can identify. 
Importantly, this mediation is not uniform, but reflects differences in each of the 
hobbits’ experiences with the cultures and perils of Middle -earth: Merry and 
Pippin each use their swords to swear their services to two different kings for 
very different reasons, Sam becomes ever more defensive of his friend and 
master, and Frodo turns out nearly a pac ifist. Taken as a whole, the hobbits’ 
mediation provides critical structures for navigating the complexity of Tolkien’s 
contribution to the cultural imagination of the medieval sword since there is no 
obviously “correct” way to engage with a perilously bea utiful weapon, but a 
host of possibilities that the hobbits incorporate together to accomplish their 
ultimate purpose: Merry and Pippin orchestrate the defense of the Shire; Sam 
dutifully defends his loved ones, with force if necessary; and Frodo serves as  a 
moral center that restrains the excessive use of violence. Like the hobbits, we are 
not to arrive at the end of a journey through the perilous realm unchanged or 
having received a single, moral lesson that reduces swords to uncomplicated 
objects of valor or violence. Rather, through the hobbits, readers are invited to 
reckon with new ways of considering swords as useful, beautiful, and 
dangerous. 
 
TOLKIEN’S SWORDS: OBJECTS TO THINK WITH 
 Recent scholarship has developed the sword as an entry -point for 
investigating cultural history, and previous Tolkien scholarship has shown 
swords to be integral to the “symbolic construction of Middle -earth” (Brisbois 
97). More than clever world -building, Tolkien fashions the many swords of the 
Lord of the Rings into multivalent signifiers that present a sophisticated 
relationship with the medieval Secondary World. The image of hobbits 
fumbling for their swords is worlds away from that of warrior-heroes clutching 
desperately for power, or singing, sword -wielding horsemen, crying “Death!” 
as they charge the ranks of Mordor —and it is the inclusion of all of these 
together that produces Tolkien’s mature imagination of the medieval sword. 
The narrative does not overly privilege one or another of these attitudes towards 
The Bright Sword and its Sharpness: Swords, Symbolism, and Medievalism 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  199 
swords but puts them into conversation with each other, holding them in 
tension. This tension is unresolved even at the end of The Lord of the Rings , as 
Frodo’s reluctance to use weapons is balanced by the pragmatic willingness of 
Merry and Pippin in the scouring of the Shire. Because the paradox of a sword’s 
aesthetic beauty and implicit violence is likely never to be fully resolved in the 
real world, the lack of resolution to The Lord of the Rings  facilitates the story’s 
enduring resonance across a wide range of ideologically disparate audiences. In 
the end,  The Lord of the Rings  incorporates the paradox of swords as 
simultaneously lethal and beautiful objects by subsuming that paradox in a 
range of intertwined ideological approaches. Throughout, Tolkien’s treatment 
of swords as complex signifiers creates an ideologically robust medievalism that 
offers profoundly sophisticated structures for appreciat ing the dangerous 
beauty of an enduring symbol of the medieval past. 
 
WORKS CITED 
Beach, Sarah. “Specific Derivation.” Mythlore, vol. 12, no. 4, #46, 1986, pp. 16, 36. 
Bremmer, Rolf. “Old English heroic literature.” Readings in Medieval Texts: 
Interpreting Old and Middle English Literature , edited by David Johnson and 
Elaine Treharne, Oxford University Press, 2005, pp. 75–90. 
Brisbois, Michael J. “The Blade Against the Burden: The Iconography of the Sword 
in The Lord of the Rings.” Mythlore, vol. 27, no. 1/2, #103/104, 2008, pp. 93–103.  
Brunning, Sue. The Sword in Early Medieval North Europe: Experience, Identity, 
Representation. Boydell Press, 2019. 
Bosworth, Joseph. “máðum.”  An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Online , edited by Thomas 
Northcote Toller et al., Faculty of Arts, Charles University, 2014, 
https://bosworthtoller.com/22436. 
Croft, Janet Brennan. War and the Works of J.R.R. Tolkien. Praeger, 2004. 
—. “War.” A Companion to J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Stuart Lee, John Wiley and Sons, 
2014, pp. 461–73. 
—. “’Noms de Guerre’: The Power of Naming in War and Conflict in Middle -
earth.” Mythlore, vol. 34, no. 1, #127, 2015, pp. 105–15. 
Davidson, H.R. Ellis. The Sword in Anglo-Saxon England: Its Archeology and Literature. 
Clarendon Press, 1962. 
Dickerson, Matthew. Following Gandalf: Epic Battles and Moral Victory in The Lord of 
the Rings. Brazos Press, 2003.  
Finn and Hengest. Translated by J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Alan Bliss, HarperCollins, 
2006.  
Flieger, Verlyn. “Frodo and Aragorn: The Concept of the Hero.” Tolkien: New Critical 
Perspectives, edited by Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo, UP of Kentucky, 
1981, pp. 40–62.  
Fulk, R.D., Robert E. Bjork, John D. Niles, Friedrich Klaeber, and Helen Damico, 
editors. Klaeber’s Beowulf and the Fight at Finnsburg. 4th ed. U of Toronto P, 2014. 
Gavin Davis 
200  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Kightley, Michael R. “Heorot or Meduseld?: Tolkien’s Use of Beowulf in ‘The King of 
the Golden Hall.’” Mythlore, vol. 24, no. 3/4, #93/94, 2006, pp. 119–34.  
Matthews, David. Medievalism: A Critical History. D.S. Brewer, 2015. 
Neuschel, Kristen B. Living by the Sword: Weapons and Material Culture in France and 
Britain, 600–1600. Cornell UP, 2020.  
O’Keeffe, Katherine O’Brien. “Values and Ethics in Heroic Literature.” The Cambridge 
Companion to Old English Literature , edited by Malcolm Godden and Michael 
Lapidge, 2nd ed., Cambridge UP, 2013, pp. 101–19. 
Reinhard, Ben. “Tolkien’s Lost Knights.” Mythlore, vol. 39, no. 1, #137, 2020, pp. 177–194. 
Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Houghton Mifflin, 2002.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lord of the Rings. 50th anniversary edition. Houghton Mifflin, 2004.  
—. The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien: Revised and Expanded edition , edited by Humphrey 
Carpenter and Christopher Tolkien, HarperCollins, 2023. 
—. “The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth Beorhthelm’s Son.” The Tolkien Reader , 
Ballantine Books, 1966, pp. 3–27.  
—. “On Fairy-stories.” Tolkien On Fairy-stories, Expanded Edition, with Commentary and 
Notes, edited by Verlyn Flieger and Douglas A. Anderson, HarperCollins, 2008, 
pp. 27–84. 
Utz, Richard, and Tom Shippey. “Medievalism in the Modern World: Introductory 
Perspectives,” Medievalism in the Modern World: Essays in Honour of Leslie J. 
Workman, edited by Richard Utz and Tom Shippey, Brepols, 1998, pp. 1–13. 
Whetter, K.S., and R. Andrew McDonald. “‘In the Hilt is Fame’: Resonances of 
Medieval Swords and Sword-lore in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Hobbit and The Lord of 
the Rings.” Mythlore vol. 25, no.1/2, #95/96, 2006, pp. 5–25.  
Whitt, Richard J. “Germanic ‘fate’ and ‘doom’ in J.R.R. Tolkien’s ‘The Silmarillion.’ 
Mythlore vol. 29, no. 1/2, #111/112, 2010, pp. 115–29. 
Woolf, Rosemary. “The Ideal of Men Dying with Their Lord in the ‘Germania’ and 
in ‘The Battle of Maldon.’” Anglo-Saxon England vol. 5, 1976, pp. 63–81. 
Workman, Leslie J. “Speaking of Medievalism: An Interview with Leslie J. 
Workman.” Interviewed by Richard Utz . Medievalism in the Modern World: 
Essays in Honour of Leslie J. Workman, edited by Richard Utz and Tom Shippey, 
Brepols, 1998, pp.433–49. 
 
 
GAVIN S. DAVIS received his Ph.D. in English from Penn State in 2025 following the 
completion of his dissertation, Reading the Old-Sword: The Narrative Work of Swords in Tenth-
Century England .  He has presented  on the swords of Beowulf and the medievalism of 
combat mechanics in Dungeons & Dragons, and will soon launch an educational YouTube 
channel that teaches medieval literature and theories of medievalism to audiences online. 
 
  

 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  201 
 
 
                    LAN GARNER ’S ELIDOR :  
                         THE “A NTI -NARNIAN FANTASY ”?   
 
                                      LAURA N. VAN DYKE 
 
N 2021, BRITISH FANTASY WRITER ALAN GARNER wrote in The Guardian, “I never 
enjoyed CS Lewis’s The Chronicles of Narnia. I read the books with horrid 
fascination. They were, in my opinion, and remain, nasty, manipulative, morbid, 
misanthropic, hectoring, totalitarian and atrociously written” (“The Books of 
My Life”).  Garner’s vehement statement likely raised some eyebrows, 
particularly given how closely his own books have been linked to Lewis’s in the 
minds of many readers for six decades now. His children’s fantasies in particular 
have parallels not only to Lewis’s Na rnia stories, but also to Tolkien’s writing; 
this association is not surprising, given that Garner was a student at Magdalen 
College, Oxford, and while there he had as tutor Colin Hardie, a Dante scholar 
and a member of the Inklings.1 Hardie was a close friend of Lewis, which is likely 
why Garner sent his first published novel, a children’s fantasy novel entitled The 
Wierdstone of Brisingamen, to Lewis to read in 1960. At Oxford Garner met both 
Lewis and Tolkien, which is part of why many readers have assumed Garner 
was continuing their work with his own fantasy novels (Hayes).   
Although Garner had left Oxford by the time he wrote his first novel 
(Lewis, too, had left and taken up a chair at Cambridge), Garner sent Lewis a 
copy for him to read (Howe). In a letter to Roger Lancelyn Green on 15 
September 1960, Lewis wrote, “Have you seen Allan2 Garner’s The Wierdstone of 
Brisingamen? Not bad, tho’ too indebted to Tolkien.3 He seems to be a fairly near 
neighbour of yours—Alderley, Cheshire” (Letters III.1247). Lewis likely wrote to 
 
1 While Colin Hardie (1906–1998) is today not as well known as many other members of 
the Oxford Inklings group, Humphrey Carpenter lists him as one of the nineteen “official” 
members in The Inklings (255–59); a fellow and tutor in Classics at Magdalen College from 
1936 until 1973, Hardie was invited in the 1940’s by C.S. Lewis to join both the Tuesday 
and Thursday gatherings (Bratman 237).  
2 This misspelling of Alan Garner’s name is typical of Lewis, who is never a careful speller 
in his letters or personal diaries.  
3 Lewis is right to point out this connection; while critics like Neil Philip have pointed out 
that the parallels between The Wierdstone of Brisingamen  and The Lord of the Rings  often 
derive from a sharing of sources rather than from a direct influence, it does seem as if 
Garner was adopting the high epic style of writing that Tolkien used, which in his voice 
tends to sound “ponderous or precious” (29). By the time Garner wrote Elidor, his third 
novel, this overly formal, artificial style is gone (29).  
I 
Laura N. Van Dyke 
202  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Green about Garner’s novel because Green was a prolific writer and researcher 
in the areas of children’s literature, fantasy, and mythology; Green also clearly 
read Garner’s works, since his book Tellers Of Tales : Children’s Books and Their 
Authors from 1880 to 1968 4 includes both Lewis and Garner as noteworthy 
modern-day children’s writers, indicating he saw an affinity between their 
stories.5  
It is evident that there were significant points of connection between 
Lewis and Garner, although Garner has consistently disavowed any notion of 
influence. Nevertheless, he conceded in a 1989 interview that he may have 
“picked things up” without being aware of it; to the question of whether he had 
read “any modern writers,” he states, 
 
Not until I’d written several books myself, and then I read T.H. White. I 
might even have picked things up on the fringe, without knowing. I 
didn’t know Charles Williams, but my tutor at Oxford was one of the 
Inklings. Thus I was on the fringe of all of that, and I’ve no doubt that my 
tutor talked about things that C.S. Lewis had said the night before. (qtd. 
in Thompson) 
 
Similarly, in 1966 Garner wrote to his publisher: “I’ve said that, having finished 
Elidor, I noticed it was THE anti -Narnian fantasy, but this was done 
unconsciously” (qtd. in Howe). Garner’s relationship with the literary legacy of 
the Inklings is clearly a complicated issue for him. What made him, though, label 
his novel “THE anti-Narnia”? This is what this article will explore. I will argue 
that while Garner saw distinct differences between his Elidor and Lewis’s Narnia 
books, alongside these differences  are significance points of confluence, which 
make his novel ultimately complementary to rather than antithetical to Lewis’s 
fantasy books. 
On the surface, Elidor (1965) certainly parallels Lewis’s Narnia stories—
written during the previous decade, between 1950 and 1956—in some noticeable 
ways. As Catherine Butler puts it, the novel certainly “appears at first to be 
retreading Narnian territory” (“Modern Children’s Fantasy ” 227); the most 
obvious similarity is simply that the ensemble cast of characters in Garner’s 
fantasy is also made up of four siblings. Elidor is also a portal fantasy, where the 
four children leave post-war England and enter a secondary world to complete 
 
4 Originally published in 1946, this title refers to a revised and expanded edition that was 
published in 1969.  
5 Nine years after this exchange, Roger Lancelyn Green lent Poulton Hall, his house on the 
Wirral, for use in Peter Plummer’s television adaptation of The Owl Service, filmed in 1969, 
which suggests that by this time he and Garner were on relatively close terms (Ellen 
Garner et al., Filming the Owl Service, 13). 
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  203 
a quest and prevent the forces of evil from taking over. While the primary 
narrative frame of Elidor is set in Manchester and northern Cheshire and is more 
urban in setting and tone than most children’s fantasy of the post -war era, 
including Lewis’s, 6 the secondary world of Elidor is a setting inspired by the 
Celtic past, sharing some of the medieval tropes that fantasy stories like the 
Narnia books made so popular. In a Welsh folktale, Elidor was a priest who 
journeyed to a golden castle in a land whe re the sun was dim. 7 In Elidor the 
novel, Garner describes the golden walls of the castle Gorias and the half-lit sky 
of the land of Elidor. A kind of Otherworld, Elidor is represented as having been, 
in its glory, the land of Tír na nÓg, the Irish Land of Youth. Its four castles were 
the four cities of the Tuatha D é Danaan, the first inhabitants of mythic Ireland. 
Garner, though, grounds his fantasy in the primary world: the novel’s 
protagonists do visit Elidor, but only very briefly; most of the novel’s action 
occurs in Cheshire. The house the four children move int o in the beginning of 
the story is based on the house in which Garner himself spent his childhood 
(Garner, “Edge of the Ceiling” 9), and the setting of the novel occurs in and 
around present -day Manchester, lending an atmosphere of realism to this 
fantasy. 
The four children in Garner’s novel are Nicholas (the oldest), Helen, 
David, and Roland (the youngest). We learn in the opening chapter, “Thursday’s 
Child,” that their parents are in a transitional period of moving to a new house, 
and their placial liminal ity is underscored when they stand in the middle of 
Manchester and, out of boredom, decide to explore Thursday Street. Tony 
Watkins points out that, as the chapter heading’s allusion to the children’s 
nursery rhyme reminds us, Roland is “Thursday’s child,” and “Thursday’s child 
has far to go” (58). Roland is the hero of this tale, and much like Lucy Pevensie 
he is more attuned to spiritual reality than his siblings, who find it difficult to 
sustain belief in Elidor once they have returned home. Nicholas dis missively 
comments that Roland “is always imagining things” (Elidor 11), a comment that 
the rest of the family repeats (71). Later in the novel, Nicholas decides that the 
children’s memories of their time in Elidor were simply the result of a “mass 
hallucination,” brought about by shock (89), a dismissal that Roland finds as 
 
6 Garner’s conscious distancing of his work from that written by both Lewis and Tolkien 
likely originates at least in part from class differences coming into play as well: for 
instance, see Butler’s claim in her chapter “Modern Fantasy Literature” that Garn er was 
intentionally moving, in Elidor, away from the “middle -class and London -based” (228) 
protagonists of previous fantasy. 
7 Neil Philip writes that Garner accessed this story via the medieval story of “Elidor and 
the Golden Ball” by Giraldus Cambrensis, in which fairyland seems to be a symbol of lost 
innocence; Garner misunderstood Elidor to be a synonym for fairyland, when in  
Cambrensis’s story is it the personal name of the protagonist (159n2). 
Laura N. Van Dyke 
204  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
distressing as Lucy Pevensie does her siblings’ refusal to believe she has found 
a magical land on the other side of the wardrobe door in The Lion, the Witch and 
the Wardrobe.  
The epigraph for the novel comes from King Lear: “Childe Rowland to 
the Dark Tower came—”. Shakespeare’s reference to the old Scottish ballad was 
picked up by Robert Browning in his poem, titled the same, about the doomed 
quest of the knight Rowland. Interestingly, Walter Hooper gave the title The 
Dark Tower (1977) to one of Lewis’s posthumously published and incomplete 
manuscripts, a reference to the same Browning poem. In the ballad or tale from 
which the line comes, Rowland is one of four siblings, with two brothers and 
one sister, who, while playing next to a church, is kidnapped and taken to the 
“dark tower” by the king of Elfland. In Elidor, Roland, too, is one of four siblings, 
and it is while they are playing together at exploring Thursday Street that they 
encounter a strange church.  
In Garner’s novel, Thursday Street is in a part of Manchester where old 
housing is being demolished in order to make way for new developments. It is 
a wasteland of poverty, absence, and despair; the houses are “empty, and 
broken” (10), with no signs of care: “Grass grew in the cobbles everywhere, and 
in the cracks of the pavement. Doors hung awry. Nearly all the windows were 
boarded up or jagged with glass” (10). Then, though, the children spot a 
building that catches their attention: “Alone and black in th e middle of the 
wasteland stood a church” (12). In this juxtaposition lies symbolic and literal 
power. The children learn later that while it is not easy to cross between their 
world and Elidor, “there are places where they touch,” including this church, 
because it was once “battered by war, and now all the land around quakes with 
destruction. [It has] been shaken loose” (43). In other words, “Wastelands and 
boundaries: place that are neither one thing nor the other, neither here nor 
there—these are the gates of Elidor” (43). Lewis’s four Pevensie children initially 
cross into Narnia via a wardrobe, but in the chronologically -earlier book The 
Magician’s Nephew Digory and Polly enter Narnia from the Wood Between the 
Worlds, a hauntingly evocative place that is also neither here nor there, but what 
Digory calls one of the “in-between places” (III.37) that is only a threshold to the 
“Other World” (36). The first land they visit from this threshold is the ancient 
world of Charn, a ruined wasteland only half-lit by a dull light (IV.41).  
In Garner’s Elidor, the wasteland the four children enter is also a dim 
place, characterized by “gloom and stillness” and lit by a “dull” sky; the light 
has a “brittleness” to it that hurts Roland (24). Malebron, the “maimed king” of 
the wasteland of Elidor, who is a kind o f Fisher King archetype as well as a 
Merlin figure, tells Roland the story of Elidor’s fall:  
 
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  205 
The darkness grew  […]. It is always there. We did not watch, and the 
power of the night closed on Elidor. We had so much of ease that we did 
not mark the signs—a crop blighted, a spring failed, a man killed. Then 
it was too late—war, and siege, and betrayal, and the dying of the  light. 
(Elidor 32) 
 
Once, Elidor was a place of golden light, with four castles: “Findias . . . Falias . . . 
Murias . . . Gorias.  […] Men who walked like sunlight. Cloth of gold. Elidor” 
(33). Malebron tasks Roland with saving Elidor: “[You will] save this land! You 
will bring back light to Elidor!” (33). Malebron is a strange and often aloof figure, 
who seems both uninterested in the children and unwilling to offer them 
explanations for the state of the land or clarification of some of his enigma tic 
statements. However, he does tell them that each castle once held a Treasure —
a spear, a sword, a cauldron and a stone —and that the Treasures held the light 
of Elidor; “They are the seeds of flame from which all this land was grown” (34). 
It is these treasures he charges them with recovering.  
Roland’s brothers resist Malebron’s emphatic demands on them, 
reluctant to make personal sacrifices for a world that, to Nicholas, is “all mud 
and dust and rock. It’s dead, finished” (82). But to Roland, Elidor is “the most 
important thing there is” (129), and it is largely through his courage, as well as 
through Helen’s compassion for Findhorn the unicorn, that “life” springs again 
in Elidor and the “morning” comes. In his first novels, Garner often struggled to 
conclude his plots. Here too, Elidor ends ab ruptly: the children have a 
momentary vision of light returning to Elidor, but they remain in their world, 
and the last lines of the novel simply read, 
 
[Roland] cried his pain, and snatching the cup from Helen, he threw it 
and the railing at the windows. Nicholas and David threw their 
Treasures. They struck together, and the windows blazed outwards, and 
for an instant the glories of stone, sword, spear, a nd cauldron hung in 
their true shapes, almost of trick of the splintering glass, the golden light.  
The song faded. 
       The children were alone with the broken windows of a slum. (159–60) 
 
It is difficult to know how to interpret this strange ending to the story. Neil 
Philip calls it “profoundly ambiguous,” and admits he finds it “unsettling” 
despite recognizing that it is the “most powerful thing Garner had written up to 
that point” (15). Tony Watkins, in an early article on the novel, confesses that the 
“ending is enigmatic” and he is “not sure” he has understood it completely:  
 
But in so far as the land of Elidor seems to be symbolic, on one level of 
Roland’s childhood psychic experience and on another to symbolize the 
Laura N. Van Dyke 
206  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
mythic world which modern ways of thinking and living have forgotten, 
the ending points in two directions. First, it suggests that restoring life to 
Roland’s former psychic condition in childhood is not enough —in a 
sense, Roland has grown beyond Elidor wit hout his realizing it. 
Secondly, Garner realizes that there can be no simple return to the ways 
of thinking that the mythic world represents. (63) 
 
Watkins’s astute observation that the novel ultimately treats the 
viability of returning to the “mythic world” is born out by Garner’s own 
writings about myth. In describing myth, Garner writes “I should like to define 
‘myth’ as the dream -thinking of the p eople” (“ Voice in the Shadow” 150). 
However, he immediately follows up this definition by noting the difficulty that 
the modern mind has with reconciling mythic dreaming and the “thinking” we 
associate with the operation of the intellect. In the world today, most of us 
encounter myth in written, not oral, forms. Thus most of our experience of myth 
is “through the written word; that is: after the myth has entered history, linear 
time, been written down in linear words, thought of in lines” (150). For moderns 
trapped in linear time, we struggle to experience the full power of my th: “We 
pay a price for our literacy,” Garner says (151). The myths we have today, that 
have come to us mediated through history and literature, “are the secular 
versions” of myths, versions that are only dim echoes of the full, numinous myth 
(154). Garner does seem to believe that we can sometimes access real myth, or 
real dreaming, through writing —as long as the writer is a visionary or a poet 
who can write, he says, with enough “ambivalence [and] paradox that enables 
us to interpret what is being said, and what we read, just as we would if we were 
dreaming. That is the way, via the poet, to the myth, to the truth” (155).  
The ambiguity of Elidor’s conclusion is arguably Garner’s way of 
opening up his novel—a novel with flaws but also with visionary moments that 
border on the mythic—to this kind of interpretative act. Unlike the high fantasy 
of Tolkien, where the magic associated with the elves is fading as The Lord of the 
Rings ends, leaving the reader with a bittersweet sense of loss and melancholy, 
Cat Ashton argues that the second generation of British fantasy writers, 8 
including Oxford educated writers Susan Cooper and Alan Garner, are more 
likely to consider the nature of magic in a world that was rapidly changing, 
rather than passing away; thus, their stories propose a new relationship with the 
legendary past, “one that draws inspiration from it but prefers that the legends 
 
8 Critics frequently place Garner alongside other post -war British children’s fantasy 
writers such as Susan Cooper, Penelope Lively and Diana Wynne Jones, all of whom 
attended Oxford in the 1950s and were participants in what is sometimes referred to as 
the ‘second Golden Age’ of children’s literature (Butler, Four British Fantasists, 199). 
 
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  207 
themselves and the values derived from them be left safely in the past” (78). At 
the end of Elidor, the reader is left unsettled: what is the status of enchantment? 
What Ashton calls “the fantasy element” is, in this book, “intrusive, disruptive, 
and dangerous, […] interfere[ing] with the lives of the children and mak[ing] 
them objects of pursuit and attack” so that, when magic finally loosens its hold 
on the four siblings, the result is relief, not triumph (92). Ashton concludes: “The 
landscape in Garner’s  works seethes with magic, and knowing its history 
enriches the lives of those who inhabit it, but one should not wish for the mythic 
past to encroach on the mundane present” (93).  
 One of the strangest aspects of Elidor’s treatment of myth and magic is 
the portrayal of the unicorn Findhorn. As in Narnia, where the four children are 
the fulfillment of an ancient prophesy,9 in Elidor Malebron tells Nicholas, David, 
Helen and Roland that they are the subject of a prophe cy, or what he calls the 
“fragment of a dream: a dream that no sane man could bear to dream: a waking 
memory of what was to be”:  
 
  And they shall come from the waves. 
  And the Glory of Elidor shall pass with them.  
  And the Darkness shall not fade.  
  Unless there is heard the Song of Findhorn.  
  Who walks in the High Places. (45) 
 
The children discern right away the ambivalence of this cryptic prophesy: even 
if they “win” against the forces of darkness, the glory of Elidor still will pass 
away. As Roland says, “things’ll be worse, not better,” and Malebron agrees, 
though he adds, “W e are not at the end but at the beginning,” and with their 
help in finding Findhorn Elidor can perhaps have, again, at least some “islands 
in the darkness” (46). Findhorn is eventually revealed to be a unicorn, whose 
song does indeed bring light back to Elidor. However, Findhorn is not an Aslan 
figure who, after a sacrificial death, returns to life; Findhorn’s death is violent 
and tragic, and does not appear to readers to be a death he consents to freely. 
Neil Philip points out that, in an early version of Elidor, Garner wrote Findhorn 
as a lion, one who dies willingly (59). The final version of the text, though, 
perhaps to distance Elidor from The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe , depicts 
Helen cradling a dying unicorn’s head in her lap. Helen is crying, and the 
unicorn stares up at her, silent and wounded: when Roland looks in his eyes, he 
cannot describe what he sees because “it was almost too strong to bear” (158). 
The song Fin dhorn sings, after the children at last compel him to sing, is 
 
9 When Adam’s flesh and Adam’s bone, 
Sits at Cair Paravel in throne, 
The evil time will be over and done. (The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe VIII.76) 
Laura N. Van Dyke 
208  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
described as containing both “beauty and terror,” and bringing a bright light but 
yet being “not enough” to save Elidor; the children need to send their Treasures 
back through the doorway to Elidor as well (159), making it unclear what role 
Findhorn’s death really played.  
 It is also unclear what the final status of Elidor is. Garner himself, in 
interviews following the publication of Elidor, seems to vacillate on its nature: in 
1979 he told Neil Philip that the whole “metaphysics of Elidor is closely 
connected with Platonic philosophy,” and Roland’s narrative arc is a 
problematizing of the allure of this ideal: “when Roland looks into the eyes of 
the dying unicorn he sees the Platonic archetypal reality and realises that in 
order to secure Elidor, which he thought was reali ty but was only a parallel 
strand of Plato’s shadows at the back of the cave10 […] he has sacrificed reality” 
(qtd. in Philip 48–49). Like Philip, I do not find Garner’s statements here to be 
borne out by the novel11; it is not apparent in the narrative that Roland is wrong 
to work for Elidor’s freedom (or that he is “egocentric,” as Garner also claims). 
However, the maimed king of Elidor, Malebron, is a figure who indeed has “a 
sinister undercurrent,” and speaks to t he children in a demanding and overly 
authoritarian tone; Garner gives him sentences full of exclamation marks, 
leading Philip to describe him as “egotistical, unyielding, almost psychotic” (50). 
Nicholas, Roland’s oldest brother and the most skeptical of the children about 
Elidor, says about Malebron that he is “self -centered,” doesn’t care about the 
children’s safety, and has no right to expect them to sacrifice their whole lives to 
guard the Treasures ( Elidor 82). At this point in the novel, many readers likely 
share Nicholas’s evaluation.  
Elidor is not safe; it never becomes home for the children, even for 
Roland who is its fiercest defender. It is here, arguably, that Elidor most departs 
from the spell Lewis weaves in the Narnia books and perhaps leads Garner to 
 
10 It is worth considering this statement alongside Lewis’s use of the cave allegory in 
chapter twelve of The Silver Chair where the Narnian Underland is clearly Plato’s Cave 
and the Overworld functions as what Garner refers to here as “reality.” While Lewis’s debt 
to Plato is clear from his fiction, as James Bryson has pointed out Platonism played a 
significant role in leading Lewis to Christianity, and it remained a perennial influence on 
his thinking, going back at least to his work in the early 1920’s on the Cambridge Platonist 
Henry More, about whom Lewis began working on a doctoral dissertation (1 –2). Like 
Garner, Lewis writes fiction that engages with the “allure” of the Platonic ideal, but unlike 
Garner he does not attempt to “problematize” that allure but to avidly explore its 
philosophical and theological implications for sublunary life.  
11 To some degree Garner invites interpretations of his work that disagree with his own. 
While Garner does on occasion speak as an interpreter of his works, he also insists that he 
writes “imaginative fiction,” which he defines as fiction that is “for ambiva lence, not for 
instruction”: “When language serves dogma, then literature is lost. […] There can be no 
one meaning for a text. Even that of the writer is but an option” (“Aback of Beyond” 27).  
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  209 
calls his novel the “anti -Narnia.” While both Garner and Lewis are deeply 
mythic thinkers, Lewis comes to myth via his theological convictions; Garner, 
an avid reader of Carl Jung, 12 accesses myth through the psychological, not the 
religious, dimension. In his essay “The Edge of the Ceiling” Garner recalls a 
childhood illness that caused him to spend long days lying on his bed, in his 
room, staring at the ceiling above him. As he stared, he describes slipping in and 
out of a dream -like state, accessing the “world of the ceiling” which was a 
mythic space for him:  
 
The world of the ceiling was three-dimensional, objects were solid, visual 
perspectives true. I never ate or drank in the ceiling (as I later found was 
the rule for the Other World). There was no wind, no climate, no heat, no 
cold, no time. The light came from no source and was shadowless, as 
neon; but before I knew neon. And everywhere, everybody, everything 
was white. It was the genesis of the dead land of Elidor. (11) 
 
It is significant that Garner draws an explicit connection to this visionary state 
and the land of Elidor. He later writes, in the same essay, that he “felt not that I 
entered a world, but that a world entered me” (14).  
 Narnia is not a dead land, like Charn and like Elidor, but a land 
teeming with life: it is more wish -fulfillment than “Other World,” at least as 
Garner describes it. More precisely, Narnia is an imaginative analogy of what 
Lewis wants to point readers tow ards—a heaven that is a fulfillment of the 
longing Narnia elicits. What Lewis often pursues in his Narnia stories, as in all 
his imaginative writing, is the sensation of sehnsucht that was so integral to his 
personal journey; the search for joy, or that “u nsatisfied desire which is itself 
more desirable than any other satisfaction” ( Surprised 18), is what animated 
much of his fiction and is what continues to draw many readers to Narnia. 
Significantly, Garner has read enough Lewis to recognize this as one of Lewis’s 
central concerns. He refers to “what C.S. Lewis calls ‘joy’” in his essay “Inne r 
Time” (118), as well as in “The Voice that Thunders” when he discusses “what 
C.S. Lewis cunningly calls ‘joy’” (225), and recounts his decision to “pursue the 
Lewisian ‘joy’” (230). Narnia is escapist fiction in the sense Tolkien describes in 
“On Fairy-stories”; it points towards a world to which readers want to escape to, 
not as the flight of a deserter but as the escape of a prisoner. Tolkien and Lewis 
were both in agreement that fiction, especially the faery story or fantasy 
literature, feeds what they saw as a healthy impulse to be dissatisfied and 
maladjusted to an enclosed, human -built prison of a world; thus it is not their 
 
12 Garner read Jung prior to writing Elidor and has said that the Jung’s writing represents 
“the most impressive modern thought” that he has encountered (Alan Garner, “A Bit More 
Practice”; quoted in Butler, Four British Fantasists, 144).  
Laura N. Van Dyke 
210  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
fictional worlds that Tolkien or Lewis want readers to escape to —they do not 
want their reader’s desire to be “stopped” at their fantastical worlds, but to find 
in their sub -creations impetus to go beyond them. Similarly, characters in 
Narnia want to go “f urther up and further in”; like the chivalrous mouse 
Reepicheep, they want to go to Aslan’s Country, a land beyond the Narnia that 
for Lewis is, like our own earth, one of the Shadowlands. As Jewel the Unicorn 
says when he arrives at Aslan’s Country, “I ha ve come home at last! This is my 
real country! I belong here. This is the land I have been looking for all my life, 
though I never knew it till now. The reason why we loved the old Narnia is that 
it sometimes looked a little like this” (Last Battle XV.161). For Lewis’s characters 
to achieve “joy,” they need to leave their world. This is key to Lewis’s entire 
formulation of sehnsucht; it is a desire “which no experience in this world can 
satisfy,” because we were “made for another world” (Mere Christianity 137). This 
longing for our “true country” is what Lewis’s fantasy books are intended to 
elicit; all symbolic expressions of the inexpressible truth that the “object of life” 
is to “press on to that other country and to help others to do the same” give voice 
to it (137).  
 Garner’s posture towards the Other World is quite different. While it 
is the object of desire and longing, at times, it is also often the source of fear and 
anxiety. And most importantly, it is not a transcendent realm but an immanent 
world that is inters ecting and overlapping with our world. Cat Ashton argues 
that at the end of Elidor, when magic loses its hold, “the effect is relief, rather 
than triumph” (92). She continues: “The landscape in Garner’s works seethes 
with magic, and knowing its history enr iches the lives of those who inhabit it, 
but one should not wish for the mythic past to encroach on the mundane 
present” (93). Garner has frequently written and spoken about his deep 
connection to place and his decision to set many of his narratives in and around 
Alderley Edge, Chesire, where he grew up and continues to live. He writes in 
“Achilles in Altjira” about coming “from a line of working-class rural craftsmen 
in Cheshire” (120) and seeing the “physical immobility” of his family as the 
lifeline for his sense of self: “My family is so rooted that it ignores social 
classification by others. On one square mile of Cheshire hillside, Alderley Edge, 
the Garners are. We know our place. And this sense of fusion with a land rescued 
me” (123). Alderley Edge is core to Garner’s identity. In a time when, as Paul 
Kingsnorth puts it, more and more of us are “citizens of nowhere,” products of 
a globalized capitalist machine that so often produces deracinated people 
disconnected from any real roots in a specific, localized place, Garner is radically 
counter-cultural (“Citizens”). Among twentieth -century and contemporary 
British writers, in particular, Garner sits almost alone; few writers are rooted as 
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  211 
firmly in a place as he is. 13 In another essay, Kingsnorth attests to the power of 
Garner’s evocation of the local:  
 
A question that has been jabbing at me for some time is: how could a 
novel be written in which a living landscape was not just a backdrop, but 
a character: an actor in the drama, rather than its scenery? Are there 
novels in which non-human places are sensate? In which the mind of the 
world is made manifest in the places its human characters walk through? 
Having just tried to write one myself, I have been looking for precedents. 
So far, I have only discovered two writers who seem to even approach 
the question. […] [T]he writer who has done most to explore the noti on 
of a sensate landscape, though, is Alan Garner. The living, jolting, 
magical power of places is at the heart of almost everything he has 
written for the last five decades. A moor, a hill, a ridge, a wood: in 
Garner’s books these are not landscapes but conduits to an older, wilder 
magic. History tugs at them, and they tug in turn at the feet of the 
innocent people who happen to walk across them. (“We imagine”) 
 
 Thus it is not surprising that for Garner, the allure of finding his “true 
country” is less appealing than for Lewis. Garner’s “true country” is Cheshire—
a place that was once North-West Mercia, a landscape that gave us the language 
of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, but now there is, Garner laments, no literature 
that “feed[s] from its soil” (“Achilles” 124), apart from his own writings. A 
persistent theme in Garner’s fiction is the presence of the land in the lives of his 
characters. Garner’s characters  live on or around Alderley Edge: readers can 
walk the paths and lanes they walk, and see the same caves, trees, and 
woodlands they saw, making Garner’s stories deeply immersive. This is likely 
part of the reason why readers respond the way they do to his novels; Elidor, 
said Neil Gaiman, “changed the way I saw the world” ( 83). Susan Cooper, a 
British fantasy writer with whom Garner has much in common and to whom he 
has often been compared, acknowledges that while all writers of fantasy today 
cannot help bu t “dip into old Tolkien’s Cauldron of Story,” Garner remains 
distinctive for his “mythic energy” ( 34–35). As Ursula Le Guin, too, has said, 
Garner is “more mythmaker than fantasist,” and, Cooper continues, “the myth 
that he makes is carved out of the land to which he belongs, the land from which 
he and his people came, the land in which he lives. And expressed, of course, in 
its language. He is above al l a writer of place, of a very particular place, and of 
the music that is its speech” (35). 
 This distinctiveness is likely why Garner is consistently averse to 
questions about literary influence posed by interviewers. Garner insists “I’ve no 
 
13 In the context of American literature, Wendell Berry is similarly place-based.  
Laura N. Van Dyke 
212  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
interest […] in being compared with other writers and their work” ( qtd. in 
Almond 9). When he was asked shortly after publishing Elidor about what he 
thought of the growing popularity of the fantasy genre, he stubbornly insisted 
on his claim to literary isolation14: “I’m not aware of it—I don’t read [fiction]. I’m 
sorry, the fantasy market, I know it exists but I don’t know what it is . . .  
[Because] critics start to be rather ignorant people, they start to say Tolkien, 
Tolkien, Tolkien” (Partington 23, qtd. in Taylor 176). In this light, Garner’s 
statements about Lewis’s Narnia books take on more context. It’s likely Garner 
was, understandably, weary of comparison with Tolkien as well as with Lewis, 
and so exaggerated his differences with both writers. Yet, all three clearly share 
a deep interest in myth and in the potential of fantasy literature to evoke 
secondary worlds rich in wonder and enchantment. While Garner saw Elidor, in 
particular, as an “anti -Narnia” text readers today are more likely to see i t as a 
complement to the mythopoeic tales of Lewis and his fellow Inklings.  
 Like Lewis, Garner too is concerned with the forces of modernist -
inflected disenchantment. However, Garner approaches this disenchantment 
from a different angle than does Lewis. Whereas Lewis’s Narnia stories frame 
the problem through a sacramental ontology that takes seriously the way the 
medieval social-cosmic model framed the “Other World,” or the eternal world, 
as Heaven a nd so grounds his secondary world in a temporal setting 
reminiscent of this medieval past, Garner is much more attuned to the way that 
in the modernist world we have lost imaginative contact not so much with time 
as with place. Both Lewis and Garner use th eir fiction to challenge the techno -
industrial reduction of the earth to mere matter, but they do it in different ways. 
It may be that in the twenty -first century, in the context of ever -increasing 
ecological crises that cut us off from the ancient pattern s of nature and remove 
us more and more from our rootedness in what Yi -Fu Tuan has called the 
“topophilic sentiment,” or our affective bond to our material environment (92 –
93), Garner’s fantasy will take on particular resonance with contemporary 
audiences. Elidor is not an anti -Narnia, but it may be a kind of companion text 
to Narnia, one that confronts reductive materialism by imagining this world, 
here and now, as an enchanted Other World. 
 
 
14 According to Garner, he does not feel at home with anything after The Tempest  
(“Achilles” 49), because the English literary style that developed after the early modern 
period and continues to this day “came from the library” and not from inherited culture 
and landscape; “In this way the academic world represented a suppression of individual 
style, which Garner witnessed first-hand when at Oxford. The heart and the head, emotion 
and intellect, ‘just did not meet’ he writes, ‘[and the] English graduates I have met . . .  
admit that they wanted to write, but they admit that because they were aware of the course 
behind them they daren’t: there was nothing else to say” (Taylor 190–1). 
Alan Garner’s Elidor: The “ Anti-Narnian Fantasy”? 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  213 
WORKS CITED 
Almond, David. “At the Edge .” First Light: A Celebration of Alan Garner,  edited by 
Erica Wagner, Unbound, 2016, pp. 9–13.  
Ashton, Cat. “ ‘Tomorrow Will Be Beyond All Imagining ’: British Identity in the 
Fantasies of Susan Cooper and Alan Garner.” Children’s Literature, vol. 46, 2018, 
pp. 78–95. 
Bratman, David. “The Inklings: Their Lives and Works.” Appendix: The Inklings, The 
Company They Keep: C.S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in Community, Diana 
Pavlac Gyler, Kent State UP, 2007, pp. 230–248.  
Bryson, James. “‘It’s all in Plato’: Platonism, Cambridge Platonism, and C.S. Lewis.” 
Journal of Inklings Studies, vol. 11, no. 1, 2021, pp. 1–34.  
Butler, Catherine [published as Charles Butler]. Four British Fantasists: Place and Culture 
in the Children’s Fantasies of Penelope Lively, Alan Garner, Diana Wynne Jones, and 
Susan Cooper. Scarecrow, 2006.  
—. “Modern Fantasy Literature .” The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature,  
edited by Edward James and Farah Mendlesohn, Cambridge UP, 2012, pp. 224–
235.  
Carpenter, Humphrey. The Inklings: C.S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, Charles Williams, and 
Their Friends. Houghton Mifflin, 1979.   
Cooper, Susan. “In the Same Room at the Same Time .” First Light: A Celebration of 
Alan Garner, edited by Erica Wagner, Unbound, 2016, pp. 33–36.  
Gaiman, Neil. “The World and the Worlds: Some Musings and Two Book Reviews.” 
First Light: A Celebration of Alan Garner, edited by Erica Wagner, Unbound, 2016, 
pp. 83–92.  
Garner, Alan.  “Aback of Beyond.” The Voice that Thunders: Essays and Lectures , 
Harvill, 1997, pp. 19–38.  
—. “Achilles in Altjira.” Innocence & Experience: Essays & Conversations on Children’s 
Literature, edited by Barbara Harrison and Gregory Maguire, Lothrop, Lee & 
Shepard, 1987, pp. 116–28.  
—. “‘A Bit More Practice.’” Times Literary Supplement, 6 June 1968. 
—. “The Books of My Life.” The Guardian, 3 Dec 2021. https://www.theguardian.com/ 
books/2021/dec/03/alan-garner-the-chronicles-of-narnia-are-atrociously-written  
—. “The Edge of the Ceiling .” The Voice that Thunders: Essays and Lectures,  Harvill, 
1997, pp. 3–18.  
—. “Inner Time.” The Voice that Thunders: Essays and Lectures. Harvill, 1997, pp. 106–
125.  
—. Elidor. Collins, 1965.  
—. “The Voice in the Shadow.” The Voice that Thunders: Essays and Lectures.  Harvill, 
1997,  pp. 146–177.  
—. “The Voice that Thunders .” The Voice that Thunders: Essays and Lectures,  Harvill, 
1997, pp. 223–241.  
—. The Wierdstone of Brisingamen. Collins, 1960.  
Garner, Ellen et al. Filming The Owl Service. Armada, 1970.  
Laura N. Van Dyke 
214  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Hayes, Jake. “The Anti-Narnia: Elidor by Alan Garner.” Tyger Tale: Brilliant Children’s 
Books, https://tygertale.com/2015/04/02/the-anti-narnia-elidor-by-alan-garner/. 
Accessed 11 Oct. 2023.  
Howe, Roger. “The Song of Roland: Alan Garner’s Elidor.” 2011, 
http://www.suttonelms.org.uk/elidor.html#TOP. Accessed 10 Oct. 2023.  
Kingsnorth, Paul. “Citizens of Nowhere.” New Statesman , 2003 , 
https://www.paulkingsnorth.net/nowhere. 
—. “We imagine how it feels to be a character, why can’t we imagine how the land 
feels?” The Guardian,  23 July 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/books/ 
2016/jul/23/paul-kingsnorth-imagine-how-land-feels. 
Le Guin, Ursula K. Boneland by Alan Garner [Review], The Guardian, 29 Aug. 2012, 
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/aug/29/boneland-alan-garner-review 
Lewis, C.S. The Last Battle. Lions, 1988. 
—. The Letters of C.S. Lewis. Edited by Walter Hooper. HarperCollins, 2004. 
—. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. Collier, 1970. 
—. The Magician’s Nephew. Lions, 1980. 
—. Mere Christianity. HarperCollins, 2001. 
—. Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life. HarperCollins, 2002. 
Partington, Charles. “Carnegie Medal Winner Alan Garner Interviewed by Charles 
Partington,” Bognor Regis, vol. 3, 1972, pp. 18–24.  
Philip, Neil. A Fine Anger: A Critical Introduction to the Work of Alan Garner. Philomel, 
1981.  
Taylor, Felix. Welsh mythology and folklore in the novels of Arthur Machen, John Cowper 
Powys and Alan Garner.  PhD. Dissertation, St Hugh’s College University of 
Oxford,  2021. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. “On Fairy-stories.” The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays, edited 
by Christopher Tolkien, George Allen and Unwin, 1947, pp. 109–61. 
Thompson, Raymond H. Interview with Alan Garner. 12 Apr . 1989, The Camelot 
Project, https://d.lib.rochester.edu/camelot/text/interview-with-alan-garner.html 
Tuan, Yi -Fu. Topophilia: A Study of Environmental Perception, Attitudes, and Values . 
Prentice-Hall, 1974.  
Watkins, Tony. “Alan Garner’s Elidor.” Children’s Literature in Education, vol. 3, no. 1, 
1972, pp. 56–63.  
 
 
LAURA N. VAN DYKE  teaches in the Department of English and Creative Writing 
at Trinity Western University, in Langley, British Columbia. She is a co-editor of The 
Inklings and Culture (2020) and helps to direct the Inklings Institute of Canada. 
 
  
 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  215 
 
 
                    OTES  
 
 
 
INTERVIEW WITH PROFESSOR JOHN MCKINNELL CONCERNING 
TOLKIEN ’S LECTURES ON BEOWULF  
ŁUKASZ NEUBAUER 
 
OHN MCKINNELL (B. 1942) IS PROFESSOR EMERITUS in the Department of English 
Studies and a Member of the Institute of Medieval and Early Modern Studies at the 
University of Durham. He grew up mostly in Scotland, where he received his secondary 
education at George Watsons College, Edinburgh, and went up to Worcester College, Oxford 
in October 1961 to read English. Professor McKinnell became attracted to medieval literature 
(Old Norse in particular), and, having gained his B.A. in 1964, spent eight months studying 
Icelandic manuscripts at the Arnamagnæan Institute in Copenhagen. In April 1965, he was 
appointed to a lectureship in English Language and Medieval Literature at Durham 
University, where he remained throughout his career, retiring as a professor in 2007. His two 
main fields of research interest are Old Norse eddic poetry and medieval drama. He is married, 
with three children and five grandchildren, and lives in Durham. 
 
Łukasz Neubauer (ŁN):  When and how did it happen that you came to be 
taught by Tolkien? In the early 1960s, at the time when you were studying 
as an undergraduate at Worcester College in Oxford, Tolkien had already 
retired (he would deliver his valedictory address on 5 June 1959).1 
John McKinnell (JM):  I went up to Oxford in October 1961, two years after 
Tolkien had retired, and did not specialize in medieval literature until a year 
later, so my memory of him is based only on a few lectures that he very 
generously gave after he had officially retired. He gave a series of eight 
lectures on Beowulf in Michaelmas term of 1962 (14 October –8 December),2 
standing in for C.L. Wrenn during his absence on sabbatical leave (Scull and 
 
1 Tolkien’s retirement speech, ‘Valedictory Address to the University of Oxford, 5 June 
1959,’ delivered in the Merton College Hall, was published posthumously. 
2 Tolkien regularly lectured on Beowulf during his five-year employment at the University 
of Leeds (1920–25) and the twenty-year tenure as a Rowlinson and Bosworth Professor of 
Anglo-Saxon (1925–45). For more information on the specific courses of lectures he gave 
in those years, see Scull and Hammond, Chronology [S&H] (122 ff. [Leeds] and 142 ff. 
[Oxford]). Speaking of his return to lecturing, Tolkien modestly said that it “has proved a 
much greater burden than [he] expected” and that “[i]t has taken much more work that 
[he] guessed to shake off the dust of seven teen years off matter which [he] once thought 
[he] knew” (qtd. in S&H 631).  
J 
Notes 
216  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Hammond 630).3 In the following term (Hilary Term, 20 January –16 March 
1963), he planned to continue with the Freswæl (i.e. the story of Finn, as it is 
told in Beowulf (ll. 1063–159) and the so -called Finnesburg Fragment) (Scull 
and Hamond 636), 4 but only gave two or three of them because of his poor 
health.5 I knew him only from these lectures, so not on a personal level. 
Besides, he was based at Merton, while I was at Worcester College. 6 I was 
lucky enough to have a variety of outstanding tutors for my medieval work, 
but they did not include either J.R.R. Tolkien or his son Christopher. 
Nevertheless, I went to lectures by both of them. 
 
ŁN: Were you, at that time, more interested in Tolkien’s academic work or his 
fiction? 
JM: The lectures at which I was present —scheduled to take place on Tuesdays 
and Thursdays at 11.00 a.m. (Scull and Hammond [S&H] 630)—were held in 
the largest available room in the Examination Schools building, 7 and the 
room was so full that some people had to sit in the window seats. Since the 
room was T-shaped, this meant that not everyone had a very good view of 
the lecturer, and some members of the audience could not see each other. 8 
This was, of course, mainly because of the fame of his fiction, but, as for 
myself, I was equally interested in both sides of his work, and perhaps even 
 
3 It could be that C.L. Wrenn, who, around that time, went to America, used this sabbatical 
leave to work on his monograph, A Study of Old English Literature  (1967). In any case, it 
was certainly too late for him to work on the Tolkien Festschrift, English and Medieval 
Studies Presented to J.R.R. Tolkien on the Occasion of his Seventieth Birthday  (co-edited with 
Norman Davis), which the Professor was presented with during a dinner party at Merton 
on 5 December 1962 (S&H 633). 
4 Tolkien’s lecture notes on this matter were published in 1982 as Finn and Hengest: The 
Fragment and the Episode (edited by Alan Bliss). 
5 Interestingly, neither Alan Bliss—“in Hilary Term 1963 he delivered a course of lectures 
under the [title ‘The Freswæl (Episode and Fragment)’]” (vi) —nor Scull and Hammond 
(636) make any mention of Tolkien’s health problems around this time (he was, however, 
reportedly taken ill with bronchitis during his post -term holidays in the second half of 
March), so that it appears he actually did fulfil his teaching obligations. 
6 Merton, established in 1264, is one of the three oldest colleges in Oxford. The other two 
are University College (1249) and Balliol (1263). Worcester College, founded in 1714, is 
four-and-a-half centuries younger. 
7 The Examination Schools is a large Victorian building, erected between 1876 and 1882, at 
the eastern end of High Street. For more information on its history, as well as exterior and 
interior design, see Tyack 249–55. 
8 This was, in all likelihood, the so-called South Writing School room, whose windows overlook 
the backside of the buildings standing along the north side of Merton Street. Located on the first 
floor, to the right of the main staircase, it is said to have a capacity of 440 people. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  217 
more in his academic work, because I wanted to know more about his 
sources of inspiration. 
 
ŁN: Professor Przemysław Mroczkowski, a Polish scholar who attended some 
of Tolkien’s classes in the Michaelmas term of 1957, 9 once said that his 
lectures “had a keen following, but they weren’t [...] especially popular” 
(Grotta 78). Of course, in the second half of the 1950s Tolkien’s popularity as 
a writer of fiction was on the upswing, but he was also, at the same time, a 
highly esteemed scholar who had made his name as an authority on Old and 
Middle English literature and language. You only went to a few of his 
classes, but what do you think of them? What was he like as a lecturer? 
JM: His lectures were so absorbing that, after each of them, I found my notes 
quite sparse. I had simply become too fascinated to write more than a few 
lines, which usually amounted to less than a single side. I must say he had 
the kind of enthusiasm for Beowulf that inspired me to want to read it again. 
His lectures gave the impression of being affable performances among 
friends, probably because he assumed that his audience would have the 
same enthusiasm for the poem that he had himself. 
 
ŁN: According to Humphrey Carpenter, Tolkien lectured “fluently, chiefly from 
his notes, but with occasional impromptu additions” (117). Indeed, he is said 
to have regularly made extended digressions, shifting his attention from the 
main topic of his class and, thus focusing on a word or phrase that happened 
to catch his philological eye. Did you have a similar experience when you 
attended Tolkien’s lectures? 
JM: I found his lectures fluent and interesting, but I was very young and 
inexperienced—at that time merely twenty years old —and did not notice 
him making any digressions. However, my overall impression was that he 
lectured primarily on various themes in Beowulf and used individual words 
and phrases mainly as examples or clues to make sure his students would 
acquire a broader understanding of the poem rather than as a succession of 
textual cruces (which would probably have been C.L. Wrenn’s approach), so 
I suppose I did not regard them as digressions.10 
 
9 For more information on Przemysław Mroczkowski and the history of his friendship 
with Tolkien, see my own article on “The ‘Polish Inkling.’” 
10 Reading through Professor McKinnell’s notes from seven of Tolkien’s eight lectures on 
Beowulf (I–II, IV–VIII; the notes on lecture III seem to have been lost), I have been able to 
identify (probably with varying degrees of success) the following subject areas discussed 
in Michaelmas term of 1962: (I) the poem’s performative qualities, time and mod e of its 
composition; (II) verse techniques; (IV) Christian and non -Christian elements; (V) 
Notes 
218  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
ŁN: Carpenter also claimed that the quality of Tolkien’s lectures was affected by 
his uncommon quickness of speech and “indistinct articulation” (132), the 
latter of which the writer would ascribe to the tongue injury he once 
sustained during a rugby match (48 ). As a result, his students “had to 
concentrate hard in order to hear” (132) what he was actually saying. 
Mroczkowski even said that Tolkien’s “speech was extremely difficult to 
follow, since it was all but inarticulate” (qtd. in Grotta 78). In the opinion of 
the Polish scholar, “Tolkien didn’t care to articulate; he simply expected and 
assumed that you could follow him with ease” (78). Moreover, in the words 
of Nevill Coghill, who evidently enjoyed Tolkien’s classes, it was sometimes 
hard to keep up w ith “this rapid machine gun fire of his lecturing” (qtd. in 
Grotta 77). Was your experience during the lectures you attended in any way 
comparable to those that are recalled by Tolkien’s biographers? 
JM: I did not find him hard to follow, although his delivery was indeed quite 
quick, but I suppose I was prepared to concentrate hard because I admired 
him, both for his academic work 11 and for his fiction. 12 (Incidentally, I also 
attended Coghill’s 1961 –62 lectures on modern drama, and his style was 
very different—much more leisurely and inclined to personal reminiscences 
of his own discussions with the dramatists he was discussing —equally 
enjoyable, but quite different from Tolkien. 
 
ŁN: According to Carpenter, Tolkien would often commence his classes with a 
sudden cry of Hwæt!, the opening word of many an Old English poem 
(including Beowulf), which some students, mostly, it seems, novice 
undergraduates, would take to be “Quiet!” (133). 13 Does that ring a bell to 
you? 
JM: Oh, yes. I do remember one lecture which he not only began with Hwæt! but 
went on to recite—not at all times from memory, though—the first 150 or so 
lines of Beowulf.14 In Old English, of course, and without any translation. I 
 
comments on the poem’s multiple cruces (?); (VI) kingship and heroic ethos; (VII) peoples 
in Beowulf; (VIII) notes on the poem’s characters. 
11 By 1962, Tolkien had published, amongst other things, his edition of Sir Gawain and the 
Green Knight (1925, together with E.V. Gordon) as well as the essays Beowulf: The Monsters 
and the Critics (1937) and On Fairy-stories (1947). 
12 By that time, Tolkien had already published most of his best -known works of fiction: 
The Hobbit (1937), Farmer Giles of Ham (1949), and The Lord of the Rings (1954–55). 
13 In one of his commentaries on the specific words and phrases used in Beowulf (derived 
from the lecture notes), Tolkien defines hwæt (as it appears at the head of some poetic 
works in Old English) as “[a] genuine anacrusis—or a note ‘striking up’ at the beginning 
of a poem” (Beowulf 137). 
14 If Professor McKinnell is right in his assessment of the length of Tolkien’s in -class 
recitation, it would mean the poem’s ‘prologue’ (Beowulf ll. 1–85) and at least a larger part 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  219 
think the point was to give a sense of what the poem would have been like 
in live performance,15 and he was a very gifted performer of it. His delivery 
was rapid and exciting. Pausing for translation or explanation would have 
ruined the natural flow of it.16 
 
ŁN: During his lectures, Tolkien is also said to have recited longer passages from 
various texts, from Beowulf to Sir Gawain and the Green Knight  and The 
Canterbury Tales (Bowers 3). As his former student —and, subsequently, 
writer and scholar—J.I.M. Stewart recalls, “he could turn a lecture room into 
a mead hall in which he was the bard and [those who sat in the audience] 
were the feasting, listening guests” (qtd. in Carpenter 133). Do you recollect 
any such ‘magical’ moments? And, if so, would he rather read these passages 
from his notes, the book, or would he rather quote them from memory? 
JM: He normally had the text in front of him —in the case of Beowulf, it was, I 
think, Friedrich J. Klaeber’s edition (1943) rather than that of C.L. Wrenn 
(1953, later revised by W.F. Bolton) —but Tolkien did not seem to refer to it 
much, so he was probably reciting largely from memory, and the 
performative effect was exac tly as Stewart recalls it. He did sometimes 
allude to other literary works—I remember one or two to Sir Gawain and the 
Green Knight —which I think may have been on the spur of the moment. 
Incidentally, student rumor had it that Tolkien disliked Wrenn’s much drier 
style of teaching, and even that the character of Gollum was partly based on 
Wrenn, who was extremely short -sighted and had a habit of referring to 
unsatisfactory tutees (in their presence) as ‘it’ (‘it hasn’t even read . . . ’ etc.), 
but that was, perhaps, only student gossip. 
 
ŁN: You were also lucky to attend some of the lectures given by Tolkien’s 
youngest son (and his future literary executor), Christopher. When was that? 
Which classes were they? 
JM: I went to Christopher’s lectures on the heroic code. I think it was in 1961 –
62, my first year at the university. I found them so useful that I went to them 
again in the following year. 
 
 
of that section which deals with Grendel’s recurrent attacks on King Hrothgar’s hall 
Heorot (ll. 86–188). 
15 In Professor McKinnell’s own notes, “Read intro. to stress the importance of sound” (I). 
16 In the words of Zaleski and Zaleski, “Tolkien had a flair for theatrics, which would be 
revealed to the general public many years later in his audio recordings of excerpts from 
The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings  [as well as, one should add, the entire text of The 
Homecoming of Beorhtnoth]” (215). 
Notes 
220  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
ŁN: It was certainly not easy for Christopher Tolkien to pursue the academic 
career, following in his father’s footsteps. There must have been some people 
within the broadly understood academia who, advertently or not, measured 
his philological expertise against that of the long -time professor of Anglo -
Saxon (Pembroke College, 1925 –45) and English Language and Literature 
(Merton College, 1945 –59). Nevertheless, would you say that there w ere 
some noticeable analogies between J.R.R. Tolkien’s own lectures and the 
ones that were given by his son? Were Christopher’s classes as informative 
and entertaining as those of his father?  
JM: Again, I only experienced Christopher’s lectures, not his tutorials (he taught 
at New College, becoming a fellow of that college in 1963, while I was at 
Worcester; at that time, University lecturers with no college fellowship were 
the most junior members of staff, and could be hired by a college to tutor 
their students with no security of tenure and rather poor rates of pay). 17 He 
was good-looking, charismatic and a bit of a matinée idol, so the front row 
of his lectures was always full of admiring girls. I (and some of his other 
male listeners) used to sit in the back row and pretend not to be too 
impressed, but in fact his lec tures were clear, fluent and interesting. I 
remember particularly how he used the Hrafnkels saga and the eddic poem 
Atlakviða to illustrate the heroic duty of vengeance, and this was part of what 
first attracted me to Old Norse literature. 18 It also made me realize how 
different Germanic traditions influenced each other, and, in turn, led to 
much interesting discussion about the Sîfrit/Siegfried/Sigurðr cycle with my 
friend and fellow Worcester student Chris Wells, later a fellow at St. 
Edmund Hall and Professor of medieval German literature. 
 
ŁN: Do you think that either (or both) of the two scholars had any direct or 
indirect influence on your scholarly interests? Could your decision to pursue 
the academic path have been in any way determined or at least influenced 
by the author of The Lord of the Rings and/or his youngest son? 
JM: I was certainly influenced by both of them —firstly by reading The Lord of 
the Rings when I was still at school. I remember, for instance, reading part of 
 
17 Prior to his resignation in 1975, Christopher Tolkien had worked as a lecturer in English 
at St. Catherine’s Society, Oxford (1954 –59), University College, Oxford (1959 –64), and 
New College, Oxford (1957–75). For a more detailed itinerary of his academic career and 
other notable events in his life, see McIlwaine (26–27) and Honegger (663–65). 
18 Amongst Christopher Tolkien’s scholarly publications in the field of Old Norse studies 
are two editions (as well as translations) of the Hervarar saga ok Heiðreks (1953 and 1960), 
an introduction to Gabriel Turville-Petre’s notes and glossary to the very same text (1956), 
and article ‘The Battle of the Goths and the Huns’ (1955 –56), whose focus is upon the 
central conflict of the saga. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  221 
it on a train journey from Edinburgh to visit my grandmother in Derbyshire 
and then looking out of the train window at the industrial wasteland 
between Leeds and Sheffield, and thinking ‘this is the land of Mordor.’ I did 
not then know that Tolkien’s early career had included a period as a lecturer 
at Leeds. At Oxford, Tolkien was famous and generally inspiring, but, in the 
end, it was Christopher who probably had more influence on me. Some 
years later I was asked to design a Heroic Age course for first-year students 
at the university of Durham, and so I based large parts of it on the structure 
and sequence of Christopher’s own lectures. This proved so successful that 
a similar module is still popular with Durham students. 
 
ŁN: Thank you for your insightful answers concerning both Tolkiens. 
JM: Thank you. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Beowulf with the Finnesburg Fragment . Edited by C.L. Wrenn and W.F. Bolton, U of 
Exeter P, 1992. 
Bliss, Alan. “Preface.” J.R.R. Tolkien, Finn and Hengest: The Fragment and the Episode , 
edited by Allan Bliss, George Allen and Unwin, 1982, pp. v–ix. 
Bowers, John M. Tolkien’s Lost Chaucer. Oxford UP, 2019. 
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. George Allen and Unwin, 1977. 
Grotta, Daniel. J.RR. Tolkien. Architect of Middle-earth. Running Press, 1992. 
Honegger, Thomas. “Tolkien, Christopher Reuel.” J.R.R Tolkien Encyclopedia: 
Scholarship and Critical Assessment , edited by Michael D.C. Drout, Routledge, 
2007, pp. 663–65. 
McIlwaine, Catherine. “Timeline.” The Great Tales Never End: Essays in Memory of 
Christopher Tolkien , edited by Richard Ovenden and Catherine McIlwaine, 
Bodleian Library Publishing, 2022, pp. 26–27. 
McKinnell, John. Lecture Notes, MS McKinnell, I. 
Neubauer, Łukasz. “The ‘Polish Inkling’: Professor Przemysław Mroczkowski as 
J.R.R. Tolkien’s Friend and Scholar.” Mythlore 137.1, 2020, pp. 149–176. 
Scull, Christina and Wayne G. Hammond. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide. 
Chronology. HarperCollins, 2017. 
Tolkien, John Ronald Reuel. Beowulf: A Translation and Commentary together with Sellic 
Spell.  Edited by Christopher Tolkien. HarperCollins, 2014. 
―. “Valedictory Address to the University of Oxford, 5 June 1959.” J.R.R. Tolkien: 
Scholar and Storyteller: Essays in Memoriam, edited by Mary Salu and Robert T. 
Farrell, Cornell UP, 1979, pp. 16–32. 
Tyack, Geoffrey. Oxford: An Architectural Guide. Oxford UP, 1998. 
Zaleski, Philip and Carol Zaleski. The Fellowship. The Literary Lives of the Inklings: 
J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, Owen Barfield, Charles Williams . Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux, 2015. 
 
Notes 
222  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
ŁUKASZ NEUBAUER received his PhD in English philology from the University of 
Łódź. He is a researcher and lecturer at the University of Szczecin, Poland, where he 
teaches a number of literary courses. Apart from his publications dealing with 
various medieval as well as Ch ristian influences and resonances in The Lord of the 
Rings, he has written papers on The Battle of Maldon, Beowulf, Hêliand, Icelandic sagas 
and the so -called ‘beasts of battle’ trope in, particularly but not exclusively, Old 
Germanic poetry. His most recent publications include a monograph The Long 
Shadow of Fáfnir: Dragons in the Works of J.R.R. Tolkien and C.S. Lewis. A Christian 
Perspective (2023) and book of essays The Songs of the Spheres: Lewis, Tolkien and the 
Overlapping Realms of their Imaginations (2024). 
 
 
”BETTER TO REIGN IN HELL ”: AMBIVALENCE AND ORCS IN THE LAY 
OF THE CHILDREN OF HÚRIN  
MATTHEW THOMPSON-HANDELL 
 
N AN EARLIER ARTICLE ,1 I EXAMINED THE WAY  in which J.R.R. Tolkien's 
unfinished Lay of the Children of Húrin 2 (written in alliterative verse mainly in 
the first half of the 1920s) demonstrates the aesthetic of the sublime, in the form 
described and formulated by Edmund Burke in his 1757 work A Philosophical 
Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful. In that work, Burke 
provided several examples of sources of the sublime by quoting from John 
Milton's Paradise Lost.3 The significance of the sublime to Milton’s work was also 
identified by the 18 th century critic, poet and lexicographer Samuel Johnson, 
who said: “The characteristick quality of his poem is sublimity. He sometimes 
descends to the elegant, but his element is the great. He can occasionally invest 
himself with grace; but his natural port  is gigantick loftiness. He can please 
when pleasure is required; but it is his peculiar power to astonish” (122 –3). In 
terms of connections between Tolkien and Milton, all of this is quite tenuous. 
However, there is a passage in the Lay of the Children of Húrin which can, if one’s 
ear is cocked at the right angle, be heard like an echo of a passage in Book I of 
Paradise Lost. Even if one hears it, that might be of just passing interest, one of 
countless literary resonances which have proved a fruitful hunting ground for 
 
1 “‘Their Limbs Were Loosened in Listening Horror’: The Sublime in the Lay of the Children 
of Húrin”; see bibliography. 
2 Published in The Lays of Beleriand, being the third volume of The History of Middle-earth. 
3 Examples can be found in Burke’s Part II, Sections III, IV and XIV, concerning obscurity 
and light. 
I 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  223 
Tolkien scholars during the last seventy years. But the echo in question may 
have a small part to play in the lively debate about the nature of Tolkien’s Orcs. 
The passage from Paradise Lost  describes the moment when the 
unfurling of Satan’s standard prompts the assembly of fallen angels to raise their 
voices and their weapons. The passage from the Lay describes the moment when 
the sight of Thangorodrim prompts the Orc-band to raise their voices and their 
weapons. The passages are reproduced here: 
 
Paradise Lost, Book I, lines 535–49: 
Who forthwith from the glittering Staff unfurl’d 
Th’Imperial Ensign, which full high advanc’t 
Shon like a Meteor streaming to the Wind 
With Gemms and Golden lustre rich imblaz’d, 
Seraphic arms and Trophies: all the while 
Sonórous mettal blowing Martial sounds: 
At which the universal Host upsent 
A shout that tore Hells Concave, and beyond 
Frighted the Reign of Chaos and old Night. 
All in a moment through the gloom were seen 
Ten thousand Banners rise into the Air 
With Orient Colours waving: with them rose 
A Forest huge of Spears: and thronging Helms 
Appear’d, and serried Shields in thick array 
Of depth immeasurable [...]. 
 
Lay of the Children of Húrin, lines 994–1007 
Like a throbbing thunder    in the threatening deeps 
of cavernous clouds    o’ercast with gloom 
now swelled on a sudden    a song most dire, 
and their hellward hymn    their home greeted; 
flung from the foremost    of the fierce spearmen, 
who viewed mid vapours    vast and sable 
the threefold peaks    of Thangorodrim, 
it rolled rearward,    rumbling darkly, 
like drums in distant    dungeons empty. 
Then a werewolf howled;    a word was shouted 
like steel on stone;    and stiffly raised 
their spears and swords    sprang up thickly 
as the wild wheatfield    of the wargod’s realm 
with points that palely    pricked the twilight. 
 
 
Notes 
224  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
There are of course differences in these two descriptions. The passage from 
Paradise Lost  has a grander, almost bombastic tone, in the face of which the 
passage from the Lay appears rather more subdued and gloomy. It is however 
in the imagery of the assembled forces, and in their response to the power that 
rules them, that resemblances begin to appear. 
The first of these can be seen in the martial imagery of the two passages. 
The fallen angels are described as “A Forest huge of Spears” while the Orcs are 
“fierce spearmen” (though also bearing swords). There is also an echo of 
Milton’s “Forest” where Tolkien describes how the weapons of the Orcs “sprang 
up thickly / as the wild wheatfield.” More profoundly, Milton’s fallen angels are 
so moved by the sight of Satan’s standard that they call out in “A shout that tore 
Hell’s Concave.” Though the voices of the Orcs do not carry the same force, the 
same dynamic can be seen when they catch a glimpse of Thangorodrim “mid 
vapours    vast and sable” and are impelled to break into “a song most dire.” 
And just as Satan’s standard represents the sense of comradeship and belonging 
which binds the fallen angels together, so too do Thangorodrim—and its master, 
Morgoth—represent a place which the Orcs (to use Tolkien’s word) call “home.” 
Indeed, that word appears in one of the most remarkable lines in the passage in 
the Lay, a line which not only echoes the infernal setting of Book I of Paradise 
Lost, but also reinforces the sense of belonging —of worship even —that binds 
the Orcs to Morgoth: “and their hellward hymn   their home greeted.” 
All of this might be little more than a literary curiosity. Consider 
though that a major theme in the criticism of Paradise Lost concerns the nature of 
Milton’s depiction of Satan, or more particularly, whether he is (or should be 
seen as) a sympathetic or even heroic figure. This Satan may not be a man of 
wealth and taste, nor is he by any stretch monstrous in the way that Milton’s Sin 
and Death are. His silver-tongued rhetoric in the opening Books of Paradise Lost 
would have him raised up as a paragon of wronged virtue, a champion of the 
unjustly treated fallen angels. Much has been written by critics (including by 
C.S. Lewis in his A Preface to Paradise Lost) that Milton is not presenting Satan as 
the hero of the work, though the fact that this debate has consumed so much 
critical attention is a testament to the ambivalence of Milton’s depiction, an 
ambivalence rather neatly summed up by one critic in his edition of the work: “Is 
[Satan’s] heroism put in its place, or does it run off with the poem?” (Milton, xx). 
Let us return then to Tolkien and the Orcs. Their depiction in the 
passage quoted above has a hint of something high -minded (if not quite noble) 
about it which, in the face of the evil that they undeniably represent, creates an 
ambivalence which is of the same type (though not to the same degree) as that 
which Milton creates. The hint lies in how the Orcs raise their voices in song, 
joining in a hymn —a hymn—to the longed -for home that they glimpse in the 
far distance. I am admittedly playing devil’s advocat e, though the sense of 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  225 
ambivalence is amplified by the imagery of the earlier campfire scene soon after 
Beleg joins Túrin and his band of outlaws: “Then a song on a sudden    soaring 
loudly— / and the trees up -looming    towering harkened / […] Their blades 
were bared,    as blood shining / in the flame of the fires    while they flashed and 
touched” (ll.624–38). Here the outlaws raise their voices and their weapons in 
comradeship, just as the Orcs will do. 
The passage considered above is but a fleeting example in an 
unfinished work, but it provides a glimpse of a more nuanced depiction of the 
Orcs, a topic which has been the subject of critical work in recent years. In a 2000 
essay, Tom Shippey argues that Orcs are moral beings, examining their dialogue 
in The Lord of the Rings  in order to highlight how they “recognize the idea of 
goodness, appreciate humor, value loyalty, trust, group cohesion, and the ideal 
of a higher cause than themselves, and condemn fai lings from these ideals in 
others” (186). In a 2010 article, Robert Tally argues that Tolkien “occasionally 
reveals a not entirely unsympathetic view of Orcs, in which what might be 
called their simple humanity becomes visible” (22). He finds this humanity  in 
the dialogues between Shagrat and Gorbag (fearful but at the same time 
skeptical of the “Big Bosses”) and in the personalities and attitudes of the Orcs 
who are taking Merry and Pippin to Isengard.4 In a 2011 article, David Tneh also 
looks closely at the dialogue between Shagrat and Gorbag, drawing out 
elements such as humor and loyalty, as well as a desire for peace and comfort, 
in support of an argument that “the orcs do show some form of human behavior 
that we recognize and relate to” (42). What is particularly interesting is that the 
depiction of the Orcs in the Lay of the Children of Húrin , raising their voices in 
song at the sight of Thangorodrim, provides a further example of what one 
might call “human” behavior, but one whose high -minded quality is rather 
distinct from the earthy and colloquial dialogues in The Lord of the Rings . It 
would have been fascinating to see how Tolkien might have developed this 
thread of Orcish behavior —another reason  to regret the abandonment by 
Tolkien of the Lay. 
 
WORKS CITED 
Burke, Edmund. A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and 
Beautiful, edited by Paul Guyer. Oxford UP, 2015. 
Johnson, Samuel. Lives of the Poets, vol. 1, 1906. Oxford UP, 1952. 
Lewis. C.S. A Preface to Paradise Lost. Oxford UP, 1942. 
Milton, John. Paradise Lost, edited by Christopher Ricks. Penguin Books, 1989. 
 
4 Robert Tally's new monograph, The Mismeasure of Orcs, is expected to be published by 
McFarland later in 2025. 
Notes 
226  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
Shippey, Tom. “Orcs, Wraiths, Wights: Tolkien’s Images of Evil.” J .R.R. Tolkien and 
His Literary Resonances , edited by George Clark and Daniel Timmons. 
Greenwood Press, 2000, pp. 183–98.  
Tally, Robert T. “Let Us Now Praise Famous Orcs: Simple Humanity in Tolkien’s 
Inhuman Creatures.” Mythlore, vol. 29, no. 1/2, #111/112, 2010, pp. 17–28.  
Thompson-Handell, Matthew. “‘Their Limbs Were Loosened in Listening Horror’: 
The Sublime in the Lay of the Children of Húrin.” Journal of Tolkien Research, vol. 
20, no. 1, pp. 1–14. 
Tneh, David. “Orcs and Tolkien’s treatment of evil.” Mallorn: The Journal of the Tolkien 
Society, no. 52, 2011, pp. 37–43.  
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lays of Beleriand. HarperCollinsPublishers, 2002.  
 
MATTHEW THOMPSON-HANDELL is an independent scholar with a particular interest in 
responses to Tolkien's work, both critical and popular. He has written articles for the 
Journal of Tolkien Research, Beyond Bree and Angerthas (the journal of Arthedain, the 
Tolkien Society of Norway). 
 
 
ST. JACK’S EXPERIMENT HOUSE FOR JUVENILE DELINQUENTS : 
RESPONDING TO ASLAN ’S BREATH  BY MATTHEW DICKERSON  
G. CONNOR SALTER 
 
N ROALD DAHL’S CHILDREN’S BOOK MATILDA,1 Miss Honey asks the protagonist 
what books she likes. Matilda answers, “I liked The Lion, The Witch, and the 
Wardrobe […] I think C.S. Lewis is a very good writer. But he has one failing. 
There are no funny bits in his books” (80). 2 As Robert C. Stroud observes, 
various online writers, most notably on the blogs Like But Better (“Nathan”) and 
Bookworms and Bluestockings (Inkling) have critiqued Matilda’s taste while 
offering compare -and-contrast discussions about Lewis and Dahl. One t opic 
rarely explored in these discussions is how Lewis sometimes offers something 
Matilda finds very funny: revenge. 
 
1 Dahl’s work has been controversial for some decades now, both due to anti -Semitic 
comments which led his estate to apologize “for the lasting and understandable hurt 
caused by some of Roald Dahl’s statements” in 2020 (“Apology for anti -Semitic 
comments”), and to concerns about cruel language or cruel treatment of characters in his 
fiction. I do not condone Dahl’s views but feel his global reputation makes it essential to 
consider the implicit philosophy within his work. I hope this paper helps to consider the 
implications of how Dahl treats characters. 
2 I wish to thank Edwin Woodruff Tait for directing my attention to this passage. 
I 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  227 
The topic of Lewis and revenge leads Matthew Dickerson to interesting 
territory in his recent book Aslan’s Breath: Seeing the Holy Spirit in Narnia .3 
Dickerson explores the final Experiment House scene in The Silver Chair, one of 
the “few scenes in Lewis’ writing that bother me in the sense that I think he got 
it wrong (from a moral or spiritual viewpoint)” (85). Throughout this book, 
Dickerson contends that Aslan’s breath or kiss represents the Holy Spirit. Hence, 
when Aslan kisses the foreheads of Jill Pole, Eustace Scrubb, and King Caspian 
before they “enter the school and with the flats of their swords and a switch they 
proceed to overcome and beat the gang of bullies and send them running” (85), 
the kiss must be seen “ as an anointing, and his breath as a sending of the Holy 
Spirit” (86). This is divinely sanctioned violence. 
The implications are troubling. We may think of Rowan Williams’s 
concern that “a lot of the time, [Lewis] inhabits quite uncritically the conventions 
of chivalric adventure, ‘knightly’ slaughter of the wicked” (44). Dickerson 
doesn’t flatly object to Lewis  depicting Holy Spirit -sent warriors but worries 
that the Experiment House cleansing isn’t Christ -like. He notes that the scene 
features Aslan’s followers attacking those who don’t know him; while Christ 
upset members of his own religion (the Jews) by clea nsing the temple, he was 
never violent to the Romans (Dickerson 85–86). Hence, the scene reads more like 
revenge than divine justice; less like comeuppance, more like Lewis “playing 
out his imaginative fantasies from his own awful boarding school experience” (85). 
Dickerson’s point challenges scholars who may want to discuss Christ 
and justice in Lewis’s fiction without discussing pain. For example, Marek 
Oziewicz sees Lewis as primarily exploring compensational justice —which 
Oziewicz defines as emphasizing justice’ s emotional and moral process, 
highlighting an unjust action’s consequences, seeing offenders as responsible 
human beings who must face the consequences of their actions, and finally 
reconciling offenders to others (54).  4 He sees compensational justice in scenes 
like Edmund and Eustace facing their choices’ consequences before repenting 
(55–58). When offenders refuse to repent, compensational justice keeps them 
from continuing criminal activity—such as Governor Gumpus being fired in The 
Voyage of the “Dawn Treader” or Rabadash becoming a donkey who cannot leave 
Tashbaan in The Horse and His Boy  (58–60). Oziewicz also reads cases where 
Lewis’s villains die or gradually suffer as compensational justice since the 
offenders see their fates are consequences of their actions: Jadis realizes in The 
Magician’s Nephew  that she has gained an immortal but miserable life, 
 
3 I must also thank Dickerson and the participants in his Inkling Folk Fellowship 
presentation on the book (“Aslan’s Breath”), especially Roy Wallen, for their wise 
responses to my questions about Dickerson’s argument. 
4 For a summary of Oziewicz’s other work on this subject, see Dilbeck. 
Notes 
228  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
treacherous Miraz gets killed by treacherous Telmarines in Prince Caspian, and 
Tash kills Shift and terrifies Ginger until losing his power of speech in The Last 
Battle (61–62). 
While Oziewicz’s argument is compelling, Dickerson shows that not 
all Narnian justice is compensational. Shift and Ginger may see their 
punishment is clearly consequences for their actions, but neither the Experiment 
House students nor the Head have that o pportunity. If compensational justice 
keeps offenders from repeating mistakes, then the fact that Head continues to 
be a busybody in other school jobs, and a busybody on the national stage when 
her friends “got her into Parliament where she lived happily e ver after” (Silver 
Chair 16.216) is rather unjust. We may also consider smaller Narnian 
comeuppance scenes that aren’t very compensational—like Aslan seeing a man 
beat a boy and turning the man into a tree ( Prince Caspian  14.195). 
Compensational justice explains much of Lewis’ s moral framework in Narnia, 
but there are large, school-bully-sized, exceptions. 
But if Lewis’s vision of justice is multilayered, if he sometimes also 
offers retributive justice, which may verge on vengeance, a more fruitful 
discussion becomes possible. Dickerson is not the first to see the Experiment 
House cleansing as Lewis’s reveng e on real -life tormentors: Terry Lindvdall 
notes in his landmark study Surprised by Laughter 5 that the police assume the 
Head is insane, paralleling how Lewis’s headmaster at Wynard School, 
Reverend Capon, was institutionalized (362). We may easily compare Lewis to 
Dahl here: as the Like But Better article notes, both men had terrible boarding 
school experiences. Helen Lewis observes how many Dahl stories feature 
retributive, perhaps vicarious, justice against bullies and schoolteachers. For 
example, Dahl turned his experience of being caned for allegedly cheating (More 
About Boy  129–38) into fiction in Danny, the Champion in the World  (112–14). 
Danny’s father is enraged at what happened ( Danny 116–18), perhaps offering 
catharsis to Dahl, whose father died when he was three. Lewis’s Christianity 
may have given him moral values that the secular Dahl didn’t follow, but 
Dickerson challenges us to see that Lewis wasn’t always Christlike about school 
trauma. 
Furthermore, Lewis and Dahl enjoy combining retributive justice with 
humor, which means we must extend Dickerson’s point: this is not just revenge, 
but comic revenge. Comic revenge provokes different reactions in readers than 
straight vengeance. It may seem more acceptable. Maria Nikolajeva argues that 
Dahl’s children’s books fulfill a classic function by being “disgusting in 
combination with humour” (Anderson). Dahl’s revenge scenes (especially in 
 
5 I have used the original 1996 edition here because it includes material on Lewis’s story 
“The Shoddy Lands” excised from the revised 2012 edition. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  229 
Matilda) are often comic, as is the Experiment House cleansing. The Experiment 
House cleansing isn’t even Lewis’s darkest comic revenge. In Prince Caspian , 
Aslan and Bacchus pass a school and frighten “a number of boys who looked 
very like pigs,” whom Lewis implies are transformed into pigs (14.196). Bacchus 
is under Aslan’s guidance, so, like in the Experiment House scene, this is 
divinely ordained comeupp ance. Given that Narnians avoid eating talking 
beasts but are not vegetarians (Myers 6), we assume the schoolboys eventually 
became food, a far worse fate than the Experiment House students being 
expelled (Silver Chair 16.216). Yet even the Prince Caspian scene is comic: “[f]ew 
can resist the enjoyment […] of seeing a classroom of smug, stuffy, and conceited 
little brats in starched collars ‘get theirs’” (Lindvall 165). 
These examples challenge us to consider whether Lewis has a more 
provocative sense of humor than often discussed. Many scholars have 
considered Lewis’s approach to humor, sometimes in unexpected works. For 
example, Joe Ricke has recently explored how Lewis  deploys humor in his 
literary criticism.6 Scholars such as Peter J. Schakel have considered Lewis as a 
satirist, generally focusing on one of two books. Many mention The Screwtape 
Letters, as when Charles A. Huttar notes that the book offers “satire” and “moral 
instruction,” two genres with “connections to an epistolary tradition going back 
to ancient times” (91). Others explore That Hideous Strength , as when James 
Prothero compares the novel to Jonathan Swift’s satires (7, 13). Sanford Schwartz 
addresses how important it is to read That Hideous Strength as satire, particularly 
as Lewis wrote that he “wanted farce as well as fantasy” in this novel (185n7; 
c.f. “A Reply to Professor Haldane” 72). 
Some scholars have seen Lewis offering dark comedy. Nancy -Lou 
Patterson sees humor in the N.I.C.E. dinner in That Hideous Strength, comparing 
it to the chaotic feast in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking -Glass (“Banquet at 
Belbury” 8). Lindvall sees taboo humor in the scene when Uncle Andrew 
describes his experiments that made guinea pigs explode (274). Chris 
Armstrong’s paper for the 2018 International Congress on Medieval Studies 
considers how Lewis emulates the humor in medieval mystery plays and 
Francis of Assisi’s guidance to view our bodies as “Brother Ass” by treating 
death and desire humorously in works like The Four Loves (“Death, Desire, and 
the Sacramental Function of Humor”). 
By far, Lindvall offers the most detailed summary of Lewis offering 
comic comeuppance scenes. He mentions not just the Experiment House 
 
6 Given Ricke’s point that Lewis deploys satire in under-discussed ways within his literary 
work, more research must be done in this area. Ricke has offered an intriguing suggestion in an 
online conversation: first, scholars need an anthology of Lewis’s humorist writings, from 
contributions to Punch to his essays; second, someone needs to produce a monograph focusing 
on Lewis as a humorist (not just his sense of humor, a topic that Lindvall covers well). 
Notes 
230  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
cleansing and the Telmarine schoolboys becoming pigs, but also a teacher and 
her spoiled girl students fleeing Aslan (Lindvall 259; c.f. Prince Caspian 14.193–
194), Rabadash becoming a donkey (Lindvall 210 –211; c.f. Horse and His Boy  
15.208–211), Narnian animals terrorizing animal experimenter Uncle Andrew 
(Lindvall 211–212; c.f. Magician’s Nephew 11.129–133), animals helping to kill the 
N.I.C.E. scientists who experimented on them at the dinner (Lindvall 358; c.f. 
That Hideous Strength 16.347–350), Tash killing Shift (Lindvall 332; c.f. Last Battle 
13.143), and Malacandrians laughing at Weston (209 –210; c.f. Out of the Silent 
Planet 19.128). While Dickerson considers how the shocking events affect the 
bullies, Lindvall prefers to highlight how the bullies’ humiliation shows their 
flaws; for example, he highlights Experiment House’s head teacher being 
shocked when the cleansing occurs  as Lewis satirizing progressive educators 
(361). Rowan Williams concurs and is more critical: for him, “the facile satire 
against progressive education is too obviously Lewis indulging in partisan 
grumbling, and the trouncing of the school bullies is a forced and blustering bit 
of school-story cliché” (44). 
While all of these scholars provide excellent insights, they stop short of 
considering just how dark Lewis can be. To say that Lewis offers darkly comic 
retributive punishments goes beyond satire; Jane Austen satirizes foolish 
minister via Mr. Collins but never has Mr. Collins suffer for his foolishness. To 
say that Lewis offers a comedy beyond satire, mixed with justice too vengeful 
to be Christlike, that mentions the body (riding crops hitting bullies, etc.) but 
not to remind us of “Brother Ass,” means that Lewis is not just a talented 
children’s author. He is a provocative children’s author. Not unlike Dahl. 
We may ask, do Dahl and Lewis parallel each other in other ways? 
They had more in common than the fact they were both world war veterans 7 
who lost a parent young and suffered in boarding school. For example, they 
both declined CBEs (Stroud; c.f. Flood). Their interest in pain may have had 
similar roots: critics have seen Dahl’s emphasis on cruel punishments as sadistic 
(Leith) and Lewis’s Philomastix letters to Albert Greeves discuss having teenage 
sadistic fantasies. We may ponder whether Lewis’s darkest schoolboy revenge 
scenes show traces of his old sadism. 
However, comparing Lewis to Dahl is especially fruitful if we consider 
how darkly comedic punishments combine humor with horror. Many have 
discussed horror’s intersection with humor, from horror authors like M.R. James 
amusing their friends (M.R. James: Ghost Writer, 00:54:41)8 to writers like Richard 
 
7 For a deeper look at Lewis and Dahl as world war veterans who became children’s 
authors, see Reist and Snyder. 
8 It may be worth noting here that Lewis’s personal humor included pranks, as seen when 
he gave Walter Hooper a bath towel when he asked to use the bathroom (Neal). 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  231 
Christian Matheson bridging the genres (and analyzing the genres’ intersection 
in his essay “They Laughed When I Howled at the Moon”). Dahl often has an 
in-between place in this conversation. Adrian Schober connects his children’s 
books to Gothic fiction (34–36), while Greg Littman calls Dahl a children’s horror 
author for how he emphasizes threats (later fulfilled in detail) of bodily harm 
(174). In fact, Dahl is “perhaps the greatest writer of children’s horror fiction” 
(173). The stories Littman sees as chi ldren’s horror are the same stories that 
Nikolajeva sees as comic. Lindvall’s words about how many readers will laugh 
at the schoolboys becoming pigs in Prince Caspian  could easily apply to the 
naughty children punished in Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.  One might say 
that Dahl’s children’s stories are horribly humorous. 
The same mix of humor and horror, a mix placing the work between 
conventional categories, appears in Dahl’s adult fiction. His short stories have 
appeared in over 30 horror anthologies, including The Penguin Book of Horror 
Stories. However, Alan Warren sees Dahl as an unusual horror writer, a 
specialist in “what the French term contes cruel, but without the bloodshed. He 
is one horror writer who rarely spills blood” (120). H.P. Lovecraft calls contes 
cruel “a class peculiar to itself […] in which the wrenching of the emotions is 
accomplished through dramatic tantalizations, frustrations, and gruesome 
physical horrors” (50). Dahl’s stories —for example, a woman killing her 
husband with a frozen leg of lamb an d feeding it to the police in “Lamb to the 
Slaughter”9—feature bodily harm, but usually treat the violence as dark 
comedy. Since they are funnier than conventional horror, it’s not surprising that 
Warren writes that Dahl’s contes cruel stories “are not horrific in the usual sense,” 
comparing him to Saki, John Collier, James Thurber, and Charles Addams (121). 
Dahl’s fiction, whatever age group he directed it toward, was convention -
breaking work existing between horror and humor, his uniq ue mix especially 
noticeable when Dahl punishes characters for indiscretions. 
Lewis could equally be considered a horribly humorous author. An 
increasing body of scholarship discusses Lewis as a horror author, from gothic 
horror in That Hideous Strength  (Nicholson) to comparisons to Russell Kirk’s 
ghost stories (Salter, “Russell Kirk and the Inklings”). The Mythopoeic Society’s 
Winter 2022 Online Conference on The Inklings and Horror featured discussions 
ranging from how Lewis communicates horrific momen ts in the Chronicles of 
Narnia (Thompson) to the talking head in That Hideous Strength as body horror 
(Brians). As with Dahl, these horrible scenes are often comic. Schwartz 
 
9 Ian Fleming gave Dahl the concept for this story (Conant 333). Given that Fleming has 
also been analyzed as featuring sadomasochism in his fiction (for a recent example, see 
Sharman), and that Dahl adapted several Fleming stories to film, there may be a l arger 
discussion here about Fleming and Dahl as kindred spirits who enjoyed combining 
humor, horror, and sexual taboos. 
Notes 
232  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
highlights the “gruesome, carnivalesque violence with which the traditional 
order reasserts its authority” at the N.I.C.E. dinner in That Hideous Strength (97). 
Lewis even edged toward Dahlesque risqué humor. Lindvall 
highlights the satirical academic double -talk in the short story “Ministering 
Angels” (358). Yet this tale about governments shipping women to the moon as 
astronaut concubines is also grotesque sex f arce, deliberately “full of weird 
stereotypes, unkind moments, and unpleasant philosophies” (Mikolatos 1). 
Lindvall reads “The Shoddy Lands,” in which a man goes into a woman’s mind, 
as a satire of modern values (365); it could equally be read as playing with male 
voyeurism.10 The fact that neither character in “The Shoddy Lands” cares much 
for people (Mikalatos) means it can be read as dissecting misanthropy, a trait 
that Dahl and other contes cruel writers are often accused of. 
Lewis was even capable of Dahlesque twists in stories like “The Man 
Born Blind,” also known as “Light.” Both versions of the story follow a formerly 
blind man wondering where the light is that so many people have told him 
about, ultimately falling off a cl iff as he tries to catch it ( Dark Tower and Other 
Stories 99–103; Starr 6–9). All the right plot twists for a contes cruel story. 
Yet there are crucial differences between how Lewis and Dahl write 
horribly humorous stories. Where Dahl might have used twists to emphasize 
the dark comedy or the bodily suffering, Lewis often leans into a philosophical 
or spiritual theme. “The Man Born B lind” may have different overtones in 
“Light,” the version that Charlie W. Starr published (6–9), but neither version is 
a Saki-style dark comedy about (mis)communication. Lewis has other things he 
wants to say, primarily about language and the act of contemplation. 
While Lewis often has villains suffer in comic ways, he usually doesn’t 
emphasize the bodily harm as strongly as Dahl does —at least not in his 
children’s stories. Villains who die from the consequences of their choices (Shift, 
Miraz, the White Witch) die w ithout much description. When their wounds 
aren’t mortal, their injuries (Gumpus thrown from a chair, Uncle Andrew 
drenched in dirt and water, Rabadash stuck on a building) are minor. Even 
when Jill “plied her crop on the girls and Eustance and Caspian pli ed the flats 
of their swords on the boys,” ( Silver Chair 16.215), Lewis leaves it unclear 
whether the plying breaks flesh. Lewis reserves his darkest villain punishment 
scene for the N.I.C.E. dinner, which covers “much of the last part of [ That 
Hideous Strength]” (Patterson, “Banquet” 7), but occurs in a story addressed to 
 
10 While Mikalatos notes that the main character isn’t attracted to the woman when he 
enters her mind and she looks like a giant, the giant-woman-tiny-man element may make 
Dahl fans recall Oswald Hendryks Cornelius talking about the allure of tall women and 
how many women “go absolutely dotty about tiny men” ( My Uncle Oswald  18). Lewis 
plays with material that could be sexual but prefers to explore other points. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  233 
grownups, punishing villains explicitly described as following demonic entities 
seeking world domination. 
Lewis also offers biblical allusions that Dahl rarely explores, even in 
his schoolboy scenes. Prothero compares the N.I.C.E. dinner in  That Hideous 
Strength to Sodom’s judgment (7), while Lindvall compares it to the Tower of 
Babel (358). As Jem Bloomfield has noted, Aslan via Bacchus turning schoolboys 
into a fleeing pig herd may allude to Jesus sending a pig herd into the sea at the 
Gadarenes (143–47). Particularly since Lewis leaves it unclear how much harm 
Jill’s riding crop causes, the Experiment House cleansing resembles Jesus 
cleansing the temple in Jerusalem; Martyn J. Smith notes how many scholars 
have debated whether Jesus’s whip of cords sc ourged or merely frightened 
people (80–82). Even in his least Christlike passages, Lewis can be rather biblical, 
which may explain Dickerson’s point that Lewis’s less -than-Christlike 
punishments are unsettling: they carry a “close, but not quite” quality. 
If Lewis’s horribly humorous punishments seem sadistic, it’s worth 
noting that he generally reserves the worst physical experiences for his heroes. 
Since Patterson highlights how the N.I.C.E. dinner takes up “twenty-five pages” 
in her 1945 Bodley Head edit ion (“Banquet” 7), I checked my 1965 Collier box 
set of the Ransom trilogy. In that edition, the dinner covers 19 pages ( That 
Hideous Strength 16.343–16.352). However, Ransom’s fight with the Un -Man in 
Perelandra takes 30 pages (12.152–14.182). Since Oziewicz emphasizes Edmund’s 
compensational pest-to-hero journey, I explored what happens when the White 
Witch takes Edmund captive. Edmund suffers immensely —being drenched 
with melted snow, struck on the face, tied up, whipped, and forced to walk past 
exhaustion and hunger —across 15 pages ( The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe  
11.107–18, 13.130–34). 
If we measure suffering by gruesome detail instead of page count, 
Lewis’s heroes still get the worst. Few wounds are more awkward than foot 
injuries, and the Un -Man gnaws at Ransom’s foot with “the nasty, blunt teeth 
[…] which crush and grind more than the y cut” ( Perelandra 15.187). When 
Puggleglum stamps out the Green Lady’s fire with his bare foot, Lewis tells us 
about the pain (“he knew it would hurt him badly enough; and so it did” [Silver 
Chair 12.158]), and underlines the ordeal cooked Puddleglum’s flesh (“the sweet 
heavy smell grew very much less […] what remained smelled very largely of 
burnt Marsh-wiggle” [ibid]). Lewis’s most famous visceral scene is Aslan tearing 
off Eustace’s skin for his undragoning ( “Dawn Treader” 12.88–91). Lewis and 
Dahl both like having villains experience pain; but Lewis reserves the longest or 
most gruesome gauntlets to characters resisting evil or growing into goodness. 
Notes 
234  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
The pain that heroes suffer also means something more in Lewis’s 
stories. Dahl’s heroes suffer, but their pain rarely gets referenced after a scene.11 
Mr. Fox bemoans losing his tail (Fantastic Mr. Fox  15), but it doesn’t stop him 
from agilely performing his greatest heist. Lewis lets his heroes have wounds 
affecting them long -term (Ransom’s foot never healing, Puddleglum still 
limping at the book’s end); the pain informs their ongoing journeys. As 
discussed elsewhere, Lewis uses biblical allusions to make his heroes’ pain into 
sanctifying experiences (Salter, “Tellers of Dark Fairy Tales” 159 –60). Ransom 
and Puddleglum become Christ figures through their foot wounds, echoing 
Genesis 3:15 when the (literal or symbolic) 12 serpent strikes the Messiah’s heel. 
Lewis may like punishing his villains, but he cares more about having his heroes 
struggle to resist evil or grow into their heroic roles, struggles which undercut 
any sense that their prowess saves the day.13 
In contrast, Dahl offers no consistent moral scheme to their heroes’ 
pain. His short stories often feature people suffering for sins (the husband who 
deserts his wife in “Lamb to the Slaughter”) or foolishness (the man with a back 
tattoo who trusts a generous stranger in “Skin”). But many stories offer no clear 
moral: “Galloping Foxley” describes a man recalling school bullying when he 
sees someone resembling his old prefect but the plot never resolves. Pain and its 
remembrance prove valueless. Dahl’s child ren’s books are similarly 
inconsistent. Marc Napolitano sees the naughty children suffering in Charlie and 
the Chocolate Factory as fitting Charles Foucault’s theory in Discipline and Punish 
about enforcing conformity: the bland conformist Charlie experiences no pain 
but every other child gets punished according to their abnormal quirk (81 –92). 
In Matilda, the reverse is true: her quirky magic powers save her. Pain rarely 
sanctifies in Dahl’s stories either: Bruce Bogtrotter being forced to eat a giant 
cake in Matilda or James’s aunts abusing him in James and the Giant Peach  don’t 
 
11 I have noted elsewhere how Dahl’s attitude to pain influenced J.K. Rowling, who also 
offers an abused hero who doesn’t experience plausible, long -term trauma (Salter, “The 
Wart, The Wizard, and the Cathedral” 74–75, 82, 89). 
12 The Green Lady turns into a serpent and the Un -Man is a tempting serpent figure. For 
more on the serpent imagery, see Patterson, “Halfe Like a Serpent,” and Muth. 
13 While not key to this discussion, the same could be said about Peter’s terror when he 
kills a wolf in The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe . By emphasizing the hero’s fear or 
treating the villains’ pain comedically, Lewis undercuts celebrating his heroes’ valor. Even 
his heroes who kill repulsive villains don’t glory in it: Williams notes how when Jewel and 
Tirian kill the Telmarine slavers in The Last Battle, they “feel deeply ashamed. They have 
killed unarmed men, and for all that there is provocation, there is no glory about it” (44). 
Christian men’s conferences may enjoy quoting the movie Braveheart alongside Mere 
Christianity, but Lewis never gives readers anything like William Wallace screaming 
“Freedom!” before entering battle. The difference may explain why Lewis often has heroes 
suffer, but rarely faces Mel Gibson’s charge of being a sadomasochistic storyteller. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  235 
make the heroes grow. For Dahl, pain is a lesson in endurance and biding time 
to strike back, not a sanctification opportunity.14 
Dickerson’s point about The Silver Chair is valid. Lewis is not a perfect 
Christologist, and his fiction featuring school tormentors particularly show a 
tension between justice and vengeance in his theology. Depicting revenge with 
humor means that Lewis has rarely been labeled a children’s horro r author as 
Dahl has. Yet as librarian Kirsten Kowaleski observes, the difference between a 
scary book for children and a children’s horror book is ambiguous (“Where Are 
the Scary Books?”). Lewis is often more provocative, more horribly humorous, 
than readers may realize. 
Given Lewis’s skill at depicting pain and how he didn’t mind edging 
into risqué territory in stories like “Ministering Angels,” he could have taken 
Dahl’s route. Yet by preference or choice, Lewis stops short of the full focus on 
visceral pain or bleak comic twists that define contes cruel writers like Dahl, Saki, 
and Addams. In particular, his (frequent if not consistent) emphasis on 
compensational justice, and his preference for heroic pain that changes his 
characters place him just outside Dahl’s circle. He offers “funny bits,” but not 
quite as gruesome ones as Matilda’s creator offers. 
In fact, the Experiment House cleansing may show how Lewis 
manages to simultaneously be as transgressive as Dahl, yet also more 
redemptive. The school’s bullies suffer, but get off lightly compared to the 
schoolboys in Prince Caspian. Eustace’s central place in The Silver Chair, a much 
kinder boy than he was in Voyage of t he “Dawn Treader ,” shows that even 
Experiment House students can grow. We may read the pain that Eustace, 
Edmund, and the unnamed bullies experience in the first four published Narnia 
books as Lewis’s own experiment: how best to discipline and reform 
schoolboys, becoming kinder with each attempt. 
 
WORKS CITED 
Anderson, Hephzibah. “The dark side of Roald Dahl.” BBC, 23 May 2023, 
https://www.bbc.com/culture/article/20160912-the-dark-side-of-roald-dahl. 
Armstrong, Chris. “Death, Desire, and the Sacramental Function of Humor in C S 
Lewis and His Medieval Sources —or, A Funny Thing Happened on the Way 
to Self-Denial—part I.” Substack, 25 May 2018, https://hwol.substack.com/p/ 
death-desire-and-the-sacramental-function-of-humor-in-c-s-lewis-and-his-
medieval-sources-or-a-funny-thing-happened-on-the-way-to-self-denial-part-i. 
“Apology for anti -Semitic comments made by Roald Dahl.” The Roald Dahl Story 
Company Limited, Dec. 6, 2020, https://web.archive.org/web/20201205234935/ 
https://www.roalddahl.com/global/rdsc-and-family-notice/. 
 
14 The Fleming comparison may be helpful again here: James Bond undergoes rigorous 
physical pain throughout Fleming’s novels, but the pain is never a sanctifying experience. 
Notes 
236  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
“Aslan’s Breath: The Holy Spirit in Narnia (with Matthew Dickerson).” Inkling Folk 
Fellowship, 3 May 2024. https://www.facebook.com/events/325198644001478. 
Bloomfield, Jem. Gold on the Horizon: A Literary Journey Through Prince Caspian and 
The Voyage of the Dawn Treader. Darton, Longman and Todd, 2024. 
Braveheart. Directed by Mel Gibson, Paramount and Twentieth Century Fox, 1995. 
Brians, Mark. “Adoring the Head of Alcasan: Posthuman Horror and Anticipatory 
Corpse in Lewis’s That Hideous Strength.” Online Midwinter Seminar: The 
Inklings and Horror: Fantasy's Dark Corners, 5 Feb. 2022, the Mythopoeic Society. 
https://dc.swosu.edu/oms/oms1/schedule/5/. 
Conant, Jennet. The Irregulars: Roald Dahl and the British Spy Ring in Wartime 
Washington. Simon and Schuster, first trade paperback edition, 2009. 
Dahl, Roald. Danny, the Champion of the World. Viking, 2013. 
—. The Fantastic Mr. Fox. Viking, 2022. 
—. Matilda. Scholastic, 1996.  
—. My Uncle Oswald. Penguin Books, 1980. 
—. More About Boy: Roald Dahl’s Tales from Childhood. Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2009. 
—. Skin and Other Stories. Viking, 2000. 
Dickerson, Matthew. Aslan’s Breath: Seeing the Holy Spirit in Narnia. Square Halo Books, 
2024.  
Dilbeck, Zackary. “ Justice in Young Adult Speculative Fiction: A Cognitive Reading  by 
Marek Oziewicz.” Mythlore, vol. 38, no. 1, #135, Fall/Winter 2019, pp. 279–81. 
Flood, Alison. “Roald Dahl and CS Lewis among writers revealed to have refused 
honours.” The Guardian , 26 Jan.  2012. 
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/ jan/26/roald-dahl-cs-lewis-writers-
refused-honours. 
Huttar, Charles A. “ The Screwtape Letters  as Epistolary Fiction.” Journal of Inklings 
Studies, vol. 6, no. 1, April 2016, pp. 87–125.  
Inkling, Clarisse. “Disagreeing with Matilda on Lewis and Tolkien.” Bookworms and 
Bluestockings, 12 Aug.  2021, 
https://bookwormsandbluestockings.wordpress.com/ 2021/08/12/lewiss-and-
tolkiens-sense-of-humor/. 
Kowaleski, Kirsten. “Where Are the Scary Books? The Place of Scary Books for 
Children in School and Children’s Libraries.” Reading in the Dark: Horror in 
Children’s Literature and Culture, edited by Jessica R. McCort, University Press 
of Mississippi, 2016, pp. 219–239. 
Leith, Sam. “There’s no Roald Dahl without his cruelty.” The Spectator, April 8, 2024, 
https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/theres-no-roald-dahl-without-his-cruelty. 
Lewis, C.S. The Dark Tower and Other Stories, edited by Walter Hooper, Harvest Books, 
1977. 
—. The Horse and His Boy. Collier Books, 1978. 
—. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe. Collier Books, 1978. 
—. Out of the Silent Planet. Collier Books, 1965. 
—. The Last Battle. Collier Books, 1978. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  237 
—. The Magician’s Nephew. Collier Books, 1978. 
—. Perelandra. Collier Books, 1965.  
—. Prince Caspian. Collier Books, 1978. 
—. “A Reply to Professor Haldane.” On Stories and Other Essays on Literature, edited 
by Walter Hooper, Harcourt, 1982, pp. 69–80. 
—. The Silver Chair. Collier Books, 1978.  
—. That Hideous Strength. Collier Books, 1965. 
—. The Voyage of the “Dawn Treader.” Collier Books, 1978. 
Lewis, Helen. “Roald Dahl Can Never Be Made Nice.” The Atlantic, 21 Feb.  2023, 
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2023/02/without-nastiness-roald-
dahl-isnt-roald-dahl/673141/. 
Lindvall, Terry. Surprised by Laughter: The Comic World of C.S. Lewis. Thomas Nelson, 
1996.  
Littman, Greg. “Charlie and the Nightmare Factory: The Art of Children’s Horror.” 
Roald Dahl and Philosophy: A Little Nonsense Now and Then  edited by Jacob M. 
Held, Rowman and Littlefield, 2014, pp. 173–89.  
Lovecraft, H.P. Supernatural Horror in Literature. Dover Publications, 1973.  
Matheson, Richard Christian. “They Laughed When I Howled at the Moon.” How to 
Write Tales of Horror, Fantasy and Science Fiction , edited by J.N. Williamson, 
Writer’s Digest Books, 1987, pp. 120–23. 
Mikalatos, Matt. “A Short Detour: C.S. Lewis’ ‘The Shoddy Lands’ and ‘Ministering 
Angels.’” Reactor, 28 Apr. 2021. https://reactormag.com/a -short-detour-c-s-
lewis-the-shoddy-lands-and-ministering-angels/. 
M.R. James: Ghost Writer. Directed by John Das, BBC Two, 2013. 
Muth, Benita Huffman. “Paradise Retold: Lewis’s Reimagining of Milton, Eden, and 
Eve.” Mythlore, vol. 39, no. 1, #133, Fall/Winter 2018, pp. 23–44. 
Myers, Doris T. “Hrossa, Pigs, and Teddy Bears: The Animal Kingdom According to 
C.S. Lewis.” Mythlore, vol. 2, no. 22, #84, Summer 1989, pp. 4–9. 
Napolitano, Marc. “‘He Will Be Altered Quite a Bit’: Discipline and Punishment in 
Willy Wonka’s Factory.” Roald Dahl and Philosophy: A Little Nonsense Now and 
Then, edited by Jacob M. Held, Rowman and Littlefield, 2014, pp. 81–92. 
“Nathan.” “How C.S Lewis is like Roald Dahl, but better (and Aslan is like Willy 
Wonka, but better).” Like But Better, 
https://web.archive.org/web/20200924070039/ 
https://www.likebutbetter.com/tag/cs-lewis-and-roald-dahl/. 
Neal, Mark. “Recollections on Life with C.S. Lewis.” C.S. Lewis Society of California, 
21 Oct. 2009, https://www.lewissociety.org/hooper-interview/. 
Oziewicz, Marek. “Let the Villains Be Soundly Killed at the End of the Book: C.S. 
Lewis’s Conception of Justice in The Chronicles of Narnia.” Past Watchful 
Dragons: Fantasy and Faith in the World of C.S. Lewis, edited by Amy H. Sturgis, 
The Mythopoeic Press,2007, pp. 41–63. 
Patterson, Nancy -Lou. “Banquet at Belbury: Festival and Horror in That Hideous 
Strength.” Mythlore, vol. 8, no. 3, #29, Autumn 1981, pp. 7–14, 42.  
Notes 
238  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
—. “Halfe Like a Serpent: The Green Witch in The Silver Chair.” Mythlore, vol. 11, no. 
2, #40, Autumn 1984, pp. 37–47. 
Prothero, James. “Lewis as Satirist and Trans -Sexist in That Hideous Strength .” The 
Lamp-Post of the Southern California C.S. Lewis Society , vol. 36, no. 1, Fall 2017, 
pp. 4–20. 
Reist, Katherine K. “Roald Dahl (1916 –1990): Flying, Magical Powers, Heroic 
Children.” From Soldier to Storyteller: Essays on World War Veterans Who Became 
Famous Children's Authors , edited by Kathleen Broome Williams and Hal M. 
Friedman, McFarland, 2024, pp.149–65. 
Ricke, Joe. “‘Text Corruptions’ Corruption: Restoring C.S. Lewis’s Critical Satire .” 
Journal of Inklings Studies, vol. 14, no. 1, April 2024, pp. 43–61. 
Salter, G. Connor. “Russell Kirk and the Inklings: Suggestions for Further Research.” CSL: 
The Bulletin of the New York C.S. Lewis Society, vol. 55, no. 3, #521, May-June 2024, pp. 
6–10. 
—. “Tellers of Dark Fairytales: Common Themes in the Works of C.S. Lewis and 
Terence Fisher.” Mythlore, vol. 41, no. 1, #141, Fall/Winter 2022, pp. 143–68. 
—. “The Wart, the Wizard, and the Cathedral: Applying C.S. Lewis’ Intertextuality 
Theory to T.H. White and J.K. Rowling.” Mythlore, vol. 43, no. 1, #145, Fall/Winter 
2024, pp. 65–92. 
Schakel, Peter J. “The Satiric Imagination of C.S. Lewis.” Studies in the Literary 
Imagination, vol. 22, no. 2, Fall 1989, pp. 129–48. 
Schober, Adrian. “Roald Dahl’s Reception in America: The Tall Tale, Humour and the 
Gothic Connection.” Papers: Explorations into Children’s Literature, vol. 19, no. 1, 2009, 
pp. 30–39. 
Schwartz, Sanford. C.S. Lewis on the Final Frontier: Science and the Supernatural in the 
Space Trilogy. Oxford UP, 2009.  
Sharman, Ellen. “Shaken and Stirred: The Crisis of Masculinity in Casino Royale.” 
International Journal of James Bond Studies , vol. 7, no. 1, Spring 2024, 
https://jamesbondstudies.ac.uk/articles/10.24877/jbs.109. 
Smith, Martyn J. Divine Violence and the Christus Victor Atonement Model: God’s 
Reluctant Use of Violence for Soteriological Ends. Pickwick Publications, 2016. 
Snyder, Christopher A. “C.S. Lewis (1898 –1963): War, Children, Imagination, 
Christianity.” From Soldier to Storyteller: Essays on World War Veterans Who 
Became Famous Children’s Authors, edited by Kathleen Broome Williams and Hal 
M. Friedman, McFarland, 2024, pp.149–65. 
Starr, Charlie W. Light: C.S. Lewis’ First and Final Short Story. Winged Lion Press, 2012. 
Stroud, Rob C. “C.S. Lewis & Roald Dahl.” Mere Inklings Press, 7 Aug. 2022, 
https://mereinkling.net/2022/08/17/c-s-lewis-roald-dahl/. 
Thompson, William. “The Story, the Narrator, and the Reader: Mediated Horror in 
C.S. Lewis’s Narniad.” Online Midwinter Seminar: The Inklings and Horror: 
Fantasy’s Dark Corners, 5 Feb. 2022, the Mythopoeic Society. 
https://dc.swosu.edu/oms/oms1/schedule/13/. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  239 
Warren, Allen. “Roald Dahl: Nasty, Nasty.” Discovering Modern Horror Fiction I  
edited by Darrell Schweitzer. Wildside Press, 1985, pp. 120–28.  
Williams, Rowan. The Lion’s World: A Journey into the Heart of Narnia. Oxford UP, 2012.  
 
G. CONNOR SALTER has a Bachelor of Science in Professional Writing from Taylor 
University. He has spoken on Inklings topics on several occasions, including 
“William Lindsay Gresham: Writer, Magician, Seeker” (November 3, 2023) and “The 
Lion and the Vampire: The Inklings a nd English Horror Films in Conversation,” 
(October 29, 2021), both for Inkling Folk Fellowship. He has contributed to many 
publications, including CSL: The Bulletin of the New York C.S. Lewis Society, The Lamp-
Post, Fellowship & Fairydust , The Oddest Inkling , and A Pilgrim in Narnia . His recent 
work includes “William Lindsay Gresham and Norse Poetry: A Surprising 
Discovery,” (CSL, vol. 55, no. 1) and “Tellers of Dark Fairy Tales: Common Themes 
in the Works of C.S. Lewis and Terence Fisher” (Mythlore vol. 41, no. 1). 
 
 
 
WEAVING WIKIPEDIA ’S MIDDLE -EARTH WEB 
IAN F. ALEXANDER 
 
BEGINNINGS 
HE ONLINE ENCYCLOPEDIA WIKIPEDIA WAS FOUNDED IN 2001, just when Peter 
Jackson’s films were bringing Middle -earth to a mass audience. It grew 
rapidly to become the world’s largest and most-read work of reference. Articles 
on Tolkien and The Lord of the Rings, and on some Middle-earth characters such 
as Frodo Baggins, were started in 2001. The articles were initially short, uncited, 
and devoid of analysis. Gradually, the community created rules demanding that 
each claim be verified by a reliable source, and th at each article’s notability be 
demonstrated by multiple sources.  
Most of the hundreds of Middle-earth articles in existence by 2019 were 
of in-universe topics like characters and places. They were written from a fan’s 
perspective: accurate, but the few existing citations were to Tolkien’s writings, 
with no independent sources to prove notability. A campaign of article deletion 
began: minor characters and places swiftly vanished.  
COMPETITORS 
Wikipedia’s Middle -earth project exists alongside free sites like 
Tolkien Gateway. That site demands accuracy and even citations, but limits 
those to the Tolkien canon. All Middle -earth characters, locations, and objects 
described by Tolkien are taken to b e worth covering, with no requirement for 
T 
Notes 
240  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
independent sources; this results in large number of articles on minor subjects 
like the Dwarves of Belegost and Hildórien, for a total of over 12,800 articles. 
These are supplemented by almost 15,000 images, many of them made by fans 
(“Community Portal”).  I find the Tolkien Gateway useful for details of 
characters and so on, where it is solidly reliable, and for tracking down primary 
sources. It does describe some real -world objects such as films, games, actors, 
and books (even scholarly ones); it links to external reviews but doesn’t provide 
its own analysis or explore scholarly criticism in any way. In the special case of 
Peter Jackson’s film adaptations, it describes differences from Tolkien’s 
narrative without comment or citations (e.g. “The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship 
of the Ring”). 
 
A WEB OF WORDS 
Tolkien scholars do sometimes write about surface topics that would 
instantly be recognised by fans, such as characters like Frodo, but they’re much 
more likely to be writing about underlying topics like themes. Their topics are 
what fans would consider speculation, on themes such as the nature of the hero, 
Northern courage, or the relevance of Arthurian chivalry; influences from 
Classical, Celtic, and Shakespeare all the way to modern sources; elements like 
artwork, maps, and poetry; and literary technique s like frame stories, the 
impression of depth, and interlacing. In 2019, there were hardly any Wikipedia 
articles on topics of that sort: one on magic, one on themes, one on influences, 
and one on fandom. 
To cover the themes, influences, elements, and literary techniques in 
the scholarly literature, I created over 100 new Middle -earth articles between 
2020 and 2024, on scholarly topics like “Heroism in The Lord of the Rings.” I cited 
each one to multiple reliable sources (“Chiswick Chap,” “Articles#Tolkien”). In 
the same period, I brought over 200 articles to “Good Article” status (“Tolkien 
Articles”). I revised around half of these from existing fan -style articles like 
“Aragorn,” probably saving many of the m from deletion, by adding scholarly 
discussion and sources.  
The “Heroism” article consists mainly of analysis of the literary effect. 
I supported it with references to 7 Tolkien sources and 11 scholarly books and 
journal articles.  
The “Aragorn” article, in contrast, provides a substantial in -universe 
account of the character’s life and actions. I supported that with 28 references to 
chapters in The Lord of the Rings. The rest of the article consists of analysis: of the 
character’s creation and names in English and Sindarin, and of the character’s 
significance, including its possible historical basis, Aragorn’s role as a Christ-as-
King figure, and his status as a Roman tic hero with physical stamina and 
lifespan beyond those of ordinar y men. I made that verifiable with fourteen 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  241 
secondary sources in the shape of scholarly books and journal papers, and a 
dozen primary sources for the quoted examples. I ended the article with an 
account of the character’s appearances in film and radio adaptations, supported 
by 18 secondary sources, mostly news websites. 
The resulting Wikipedia articles are neither like items on a fan website, 
nor quite like scholarly papers. Wikipedia’s rule against “Original Research” 
forbids editors from adding anything in the way of opinions or conclusions 
inferred by reasoning from th e cited materials ( Wikipedia, “No original 
research”). On the other hand, writing an article is certainly a creative process. I 
selected sources, arranged materials, explained concepts, chose examples, and 
prepared illustrations, shaping something that did  not exist before. I went 
further with extensive cross -linking, weaving all the articles into a newly 
coherent web. In a conventional encyclopedia, cross -references are made 
typographically, with phrases like “ see Hobbit.” In a Wiki, the reader clicks on 
a “Hobbit” hyperlink, and is at once taken to that article. The result, I believe, is 
a body of information accessible to a new and very large audience. 
 
DIAGRAMS AND TABLES  
In addition to cited text, I created at least 75 Middle -earth diagrams 
(“Chiswick Chap,” “Diagrams”), and many tables embedded in articles, 
summarising scholarly analyses. The rules on illustrations are slightly more 
relaxed than those on claims in the tex t, but the same considerations apply: the 
material must be relevant, and any claims made must be supported by citations 
in the image caption. For example, Figure 1 shows a simple diagram that I made 
presenting Tom Shippey’s textual explanation of the origins of the names 
“Huggins” and “Baggins”. The diagram explains their surface similarity but 
their quite different etymologies (Shippey 8). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: A diagram presenting a textual description by Tom Shippey. “Chiswick 
Chap,” on Wikimedia Commons. 
 
Notes 
242  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
An alternative approach used in many Middle -earth articles is to 
summarize and display the outlines of a scholar’s analysis using a table. For 
instance, Table 1 shows my table of Ben Reinhard’s analysis of types of hero in 
the article “Heroism in The Lord of the Rings. ” My goal was to present the key 
elements of a scholarly analysis concisely for the general reader.  
 
Type of 
hero 
Example Characteristics 
Chivalric 
knight 
Lancelot Noble, French-style; powerful, armoured, on 
horseback; courtly love; success assured 
Hobbit Frodo 
Baggins 
“modern, bourgeois, [...] small”; humble; 
success far from guaranteed 
Ranger Aragorn “half-wild, mistrusted”; “stern in battle, 
gentle in hall”; ascetic; universally scorned 
Table 1: A table from the article “Heroism in The Lord of the Rings,” based on analysis by Ben 
Reinhard in “Tolkien’s Lost Knights.” 
 
READERSHIP 
Wikipedia’s Middle-earth articles were together viewed over 7 million 
times in August 2024. The top 20 articles by number of views included those on 
Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings , and The Hobbit , but also some actors in Peter 
Jackson’s film series, namely Ian Holm (who played Bilbo), Christopher Lee 
(Saruman), and Elijah Wood (Frodo), and several film and television articles. 
The top Middle -earth character was Sauron, followed by Morgoth, Galadri el, 
and Isildur, all of whom feature in the Amazon series The Lord of the Rings: The 
Rings of Power, which has been showing since 2022; its series article was the top 
article in the month, with over 21,000 views a day (Wikipedia, “WikiProject 
Middle-earth/Popular pages”). There is considerable month-to-month turnover 
among the most viewed articles.  
The top Middle -earth article on a scholarly theme is “Cosmology of 
Tolkien’s legendarium,” with over 1,400 views per day. It is followed by 
“Tolkien and race” at over 300 views per day, still equating to well over 100,000 
views per year; “Christianity in M iddle-earth” at over 240 views per day; and 
some way further down the list, “Sexuality in The Lord of the Rings” at over 100 
views per day. The popularity of these themes shows that Wikipedia views 
broadly follow the trend identified by Karen Viars and Cait Coker, namely that 
Tolkien fans have “unsurprisingly focused on many of those topics Tolkien 
scholars are fond of today —homosexual overtones [...], racism [...], Tolkien's 
literary sources and forebears, and the roles of women in his world” (37).  
 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  243 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
“Chiswick Chap.” “Articles#Tolkien.” Wikipedia, 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/ 
wiki/User:Chiswick_Chap/Articles#Tolkien. 
—. “Diagrams#Tolkien’s Middle-earth.” Wikipedia, 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
User:Chiswick_Chap/Diagrams#Tolkien's_Middle-earth. 
“Community Portal.” Tolkien Gateway , 2024. https://tolkiengateway.net/ 
wiki/Tolkien_Gateway:Community_Portal. 
“The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring. ” Tolkien Gateway, 2024. 
https://tolkiengateway.net/wiki/The_Lord_of_the_Rings:_The_Fellowship_of_the_Ring  
“No original research.” Wikipedia, 2024. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Wikipedia:No_original_research. 
Reinhard, Ben. “Tolkien's Lost Knights.” Mythlore. vol. 39, no. 1, #137, 2020, pp. 177-94. 
Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. HarperCollins, 2001. 
“Tolkien Articles —GA quality.” Wikipedia 1.0 Server , 2024. https:// 
wp1.openzim.org/#/project/Tolkien/articles?quality=GA-Class. 
Viars, Karen and Cait Coker. “Constructing Lothiriel: Rewriting and Rescuing the Women 
of Middle-Earth from the Margins.” Mythlore vol. 33, no. 2, #126, 2015, pp. 35-48.  
“WikiProject Middle -earth/Popular pages.” Wikipedia, 2024.  https:// 
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:WikiProject_Middle-earth/ Popular_pages. 
 
IAN F. ALEXANDER is a writer and a volunteer with London Wildlife Trust. He 
published The English Love Affair with Nature in 2015, and was the lead author on West 
London Wildlife (Supernova Books) in 2022. Since 2020 he has contributed to 
Wikipedia's Middle-earth project as “Chiswick Chap.” Before his retirement, he was 
a systems engineer and the lead author of Writing Better Requirements  (Addison-
Wesley) in 2002, Scenarios, Stories, Use Cases  (Wiley) in 2004, and Discovering 
Requirements (Wiley) in 2009. 
 
 
 
WHAT WILL WE DO WITH THE CHRISTMAS PUDDING ?:  
JOY DAVIDMAN , WILLIAM LINDSAY GRESHAM , AND “CHRISTMAS IN 
THE WORKHOUSE ” 
G. CONNOR SALTER AND CLARK SHELDON 
 
OST INKLINGS SCHOLARS FAMILIAR WITH JOY DAVIDMAN (1915–1960) and 
her first husband William Lindsay Gresham (1909 –1962) know they 
were both involved in American leftwing literary circles. They were active 
members of the Communist Party of the United States of America (CPUSA) 
from the 1930s until the early to mid -1940s, becoming far less active after they 
M 
Notes 
244  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
became parents. Abigail Santamaria notes they likely met through a key 
leftwing writers’ circle, the League of American Writers, in the late 1930s and 
that the first record of their appearing at the same event was in 1941 at the 
Fourth Annual Congress of the League of American Writers (118, 123). 
Their politics informed their writing in various ways. Davidman was a 
poetry editor and contributor to the New Masses and edited two leftwing poetry 
collections: They Look Like Men  and War Poems of the United Nations . Gresham 
volunteered to serve in the Spanish Civil War and served as a medic in the 
Abraham Lincoln Brigade, contributing one poem about his experience, “Last 
Kilometer,” to War Poems of the United Nations  (319). The poem has proved 
popular enough to be reprinted several times (Nelson 157, Bios ca 177 –80, 
Herrmann 13). While more detailed work has been published on Davidman’s 
two novels Anya and Weeping Bay (Hammond 235 –45, King 114 –35, 143 –52), 
including notes on how leftwing ideas inform those books, there is also room to 
discuss these political concerns in Gresham’s fiction. Alan M. Wald has 
suggested that Gresham’s two novels Nightmare Alley  and Limbo Tower  are 
informed by at least collectivist if not pro -communist concerns (Salter, “Joy 
Davidman, William Lindsay Gresham, and the American Literary Left” 1). 
The leftwing politics becomes especially important when discussing 
some of Gresham’s archival works. As G. Connor Salter and Sørina Higgins 
have reported (“Friar Jack the Sci-Fi Apologist”), the folder “Poems, 1941–1944” 
in the William Lindsay Gresham Pape rs in the Marion E. Wade Center at 
Wheaton College1 shows that Gresham was a more prolific poet than previously 
assumed. The folder contains several never -published poems written by 
Gresham, two drafts of “Last Kilometer” (Gresham’s only published poem 
during his lifetime), and several transcripts of famou s leftwing poems by other 
authors. Since 2023, two of Gresham’s original poems from this folder, 
“Rahnhild” and “The Friar of Oxford,” have been published (see Salter, 
“William Lindsay Gresham and Norse Poetry,” and Higgins and Salter, “Friar 
Jack”). 
One of the more interesting items in the folder is the following poem: 
 
Christmas in the Workhouse 
It was Christmas in the workhouse, 
Happiest day of all the year, 
And the paupers was contented 
‘Cause their guts was full of beer. 
 
 
1 Joe R. Christopher was the first writer to mention one of the folder’s contents in print: he 
notes the existence of “The Friar of Oxford” in his review of the Don W. King -edited 
collection of Davidman’s poetry, A Naked Tree (186). 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  245 
The Master of the workhouse 
Strode through the dismal halls 
And cried, “A Merry Christmas!” 
But the paupers answered, “Balls!” 
 
Then angry was the Master 
And he swore by all the gods 
That they’d have no Christmas pudding, 
The lousy bunch of twatts. 
 
Up spake a war-scarred veteran 
Who had stormed the Khyber Pass, 
“You can tyke yer Christmas puddin’, sir, 
“An’ stick it up yer ass!!!” 
 
Following the poem’s ending line is an indented two -sentence note in 
parentheses. It describes the poem as, in the writer’s opinion, “one of the better 
contributions of Great Britain to world culture in general and poetry in particular” 
and argues that “on ly a member of the British lumpen proletaria t [sic] can get the 
full effect of scorn, hate, disgust and respect for authority out of the last two lines.” 
To say the least, this poem is intriguing. Stylistically, it is very different 
from other contents in the folder. The other poems are primarily about Spain 
and in the same style as “Last Kilometer”: harrowing first -person accounts of 
battlegrounds. “Rahnhild” and “The Friar of Oxford” are exceptions to this rule, 
but also very different from “Christmas in the Workhouse”: one is a faux Norse 
myth piece, the other an homage to Winnifred M. Letts’s World War I poem 
“The Spires of Oxford” intermingled with science fiction imagery. 
In fact, “Christmas in the Workhouse” has a long history that 
predates Gresham.  
 
LOCATING “CHRISTMAS IN THE WORKHOUSE” 
As Victorian history or literature specialists may know, “Christmas in 
the Workhouse” was originally a ballad by George Robert Sims titled “In the 
Workhouse. Christmas Day” (Sims 7). Sims first published his ballad in 1877 in 
The Referee (Jakobs 152). Many variations have appeared since then. Since the 
original ballad was published well before 1923 (the cutoff year in American 
copyright law) and the variations are mostly transmitted orally with no known 
lyricist, the poem and its many off shoots are necessar ily outside copyright. 
Sims’ original version, printed below, has a much more formal style than 
Gresham’s transcript. 
 
 
 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  246 
IN THE WORKHOUSE. CHRISTMAS DAY. 
 
It is Christmas Day in the Workhouse, 
And the cold bare walls are bright 
With garlands of green and holly, 
And the place is a pleasant sight: 
For with clean-washed hands and faces, 
In a long and hungry line 
The paupers sit at the tables 
For this is the hour they dine. 
 
And the guardians and their ladies, 
Although the wind is east, 
Have come in their furs and wrappers, 
To watch their charges feast; 
To smile and be condescending, 
Put pudding on pauper plates, 
To be hosts at the workhouse banquet 
They’ve paid for—with the rates. 
 
Oh, the paupers are meek and lowly 
With their “Thank’ee kindly, mum’s” 
So long as they fill their stomachs, 
What matter it whence it comes? 
But one of the old men mutters, 
And pushes his plate aside: 
“Great God!” he cries; “but it chokes me! 
For this is the day she died.” 
 
The guardians gazed in horror, 
The master’s face went white; 
“Did a pauper refuse their pudding?” 
“Could their ears believe aright?” 
Then the ladies clutched their 
husbands, 
Thinking the man would die, 
Struck by a bolt, or something, 
By the outraged One on high. 
 
But the pauper sat for a moment, 
Then rose ‘mid a silence grim, 
For the others had ceased to chatter 
And trembled in every limb. 
He looked at the guardians’ ladies, 
Then, eyeing their lords, he said, 
“I eat not the food of villains 
Whose hands are foul and red: 
 
“Whose victims cry for vengeance 
From their dank, unhallowed graves.” 
“He’s drunk!” said the workhouse 
master, 
“Or else he’s mad, and raves.” 
“Not drunk or mad,” cried the pauper, 
“But only a hunted beast, 
Who, torn by the hounds and mangled, 
Declines the vulture’s feast. 
 
“I care not a curse for the guardians, 
And I won’t be dragged away. 
Just let me have the fit out, 
It’s only on Christmas Day 
That the black past comes to goad me, 
And prey on my burning brain; 
I’ll tell you the rest in a whisper,— 
I swear I won’t shout again. 
 
“Keep your hands off me, curse you! 
Hear me right out to the end. 
You came here to see how paupers 
The season of Christmas spend. 
You came here to watch us feeding, 
As they watch the captured beast. 
Hear why a penniless pauper 
Spits on your paltry feast. 
 
“Do you think I will take your bounty, 
And let you smile and think 
You’re doing a noble action 
With the parish’s meat and drink? 
Where’s my wife, you traitors— 
The poor old wife you slew? 
Yes, by the God above us, 
My Nance was killed by you! 
 
“Last winter my wife lay dying, 
Starved in a filthy den; 
I had never been to the parish,— 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  247 
I came to the parish then. 
I swallowed my pride in coming, 
For, ere the ruin came, 
I held up my head as a trader, 
And I bore a spotless name. 
 
“I came to the parish, craving 
Break for a starving wife, 
Bread for the woman who'd loved me 
Through fifty years of life; 
And what do you think they told me, 
Mocking my awful grief? 
That ‘the House’ was open to us, 
But they wouldn’t give ‘out relief.’ 
 
“I slunk to the filthy alley— 
‘Twas a cold, raw Christmas eve— 
And the bakers’ shops were open, 
Tempting a man to thieve; 
But I clenched my fists together, 
Holding my head awry, 
So I come to her empty-handed 
And mournfully told her why. 
 
“When I told her ‘the House’ was open; 
She had heard of the ways of that, 
For her bloodless cheeks went crimson, 
And up in her rags she sat, 
Crying, ‘Bide the Christmas here, John, 
We’ve never had one apart; 
I think I can bear the hunger,— 
The other would break my heart.’ 
“All through that eve I watched her, 
Holding her hand in mine, 
Praying the Lord, and weeping, 
Till my lips were salt as brine. 
I asked her once if she hungered, 
And as she answered ‘No,’ 
The moon shone in at the window 
Set in a wreath of snow. 
 
“Then the room was bathed in glory, 
And I saw in my darling’s eyes 
The far-away look of wonder 
That comes when the spirit flies; 
And her lips were parched and parted, 
And her reason came and went, 
For she raved of our home in Devon, 
Where our happiest years were spent. 
 
“And the accents, long forgotten, 
Came back to the tongue once more, 
For she talked like the country lassie 
I woo’d by the Devon shore. 
Then she rose to her feet and trembled, 
And fell on the rags and moaned, 
And, ‘Give me a crust—I’m famished— 
For the love of God!’ she groaned. 
 
 “I rushed from the room like a 
madman, 
And flew to the workhouse gate, 
Crying, ‘Food for a dying woman!’ 
And the answer came, ‘Too late.’ 
They drove me away with curses; 
Then I fought with a dog in the street, 
And tore from the mongrel’s clutches 
A crust he was trying to eat. 
 
“Back, through the filthy by-lanes! 
Back, through the trampled slush! 
Up to the crazy garret, 
Wrapped in an awful hush. 
My heart sank down at the threshold, 
And I paused with a sudden thrill, 
For there in the silv’ry moonlight 
My Nance lay, cold and still. 
 
“Up to the blackened ceiling 
The sunken eyes were cast— 
I knew on those lips all bloodless 
My name had been the last; 
She’d called for her absent husband— 
O God! had I but known!— 
Had called in vain, and in anguish 
Had died in that den—alone. 
 
 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  248 
“Yes, there, in a land of plenty, 
Lay a loving woman dead, 
Cruelly starved and murdered 
For a loaf of the parish bread. 
At yonder gate, last Christmas, 
I craved for a human life. 
You, who would feast us paupers, 
What of my murdered wife! 
                        * * * 
“There, get ye gone to your dinners; 
Don't mind me in the least; 
Think of the happy paupers 
Eating your Christmas feast; 
And when you recount their 
blessings 
In your smug parochial way, 
Say what you did for me, too, 
Only last Christmas Day. 
 
 
SIMILAR VARIATIONS ON “CHRISTMAS IN THE WORKHOUSE” 
The version of “Christmas in the Workhouse” in Gresham’s folder does 
not appear to have been printed anywhere until now. A similar version (rude 
final line and the Khyber Pass reference included, but some words changed) is 
quoted in George Henry Wilkin’s memoir Certified (179). A character played by 
Ed Asner recites another variation in the 1977 Christmas movie The Gathering 
(57:00–58:35), but this variation also changes some wording (for example, “And 
the paupers was contented” is rendered “And the paupers all was happy”). The 
fact that The Gathering  features Asner’s character attributing the poem to 
Rudyard Kipling (57:00–58:35) gives an idea how this Sims poem had survived 
and evolved in public memory until the general public forgot its origin. 
But how did this poem arrive in Gresham’s papers? Aside from a 
handwritten letter written to Gresham containing a poem, there is no clear 
evidence that “Poems, 1941 –1944” features any documents that Gresham or 
Davidman received from others. Therefore, one of them presumably transcribed 
“Christmas in the Workhouse.” Given that the poem (both Sims’ original and 
this more profane variation) are leftwing protest anthems a gainst managers 
exploiting workers, it is precisely the kind of poem that both Gresham and 
Davidman would have heard in 1930s –40s CPUSA circles. However, since the 
poem has many variations, it is hard to say exactly when they would have heard 
it. The folder is tentatively dated 1941–1944 because most of its poems appear to 
have been written afte r Gresham returned to America in 1938 from Spain. 1 As 
Higgins and Salter discuss, “The Friar of Oxford,” was likely written several 
years later in 1946–1950 (Higgins and Salter 250–251). 
 The note attached to the poem may offer further clues. 
 
 
 
 
1 Five of these poems were recently published in The Volunteer, the magazine devoted to 
scholarship on The Abraham Lincoln Brigade (Salter, “Beyond the Last Kilometer.” 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  249 
CONSIDERING THE “LUMPENPROLETARIAT” NOTE 
The note and the poem are both typed, which makes it impossible to 
use handwriting analysis to determine whether Davidman or Gresham wrote it 
or date its composition period based on how their handwriting styles evolved. 
Instead, one must consider whether the note’s language or style offers any hints. 
The word “lumpenproletariat” is German for “rabble proletariat,” and 
a Marxist term for the very lowest social class (“Lumpenproletariat”). Therefore, 
this note could have been written by either Davidman or Gresham: any writer 
in 1930s–40s leftwing artist circles would have been familiar with the phrase. 
Since the poem was British, and Davidman was a self -described 
Anglophile, she may seem the better candidate for writing the note. Don W. 
King was consulted and said he could not recall seeing the poem anywhere in 
Davidman’s papers and felt it was unlikely she transcribed it or wrote the note 
(“Weird Davidman Research Question”). He pointed out that “Christmas in the 
Workhouse” could easily be something Davidman received while editing the 
New Masses and rejected since it has a didactic tone; she regularly re jected such 
submissions and criticized the submitters for sending in propaganda instead of 
well-crafted work (ibid). 
However, “Christmas in the Workhouse” seems unlikely to be a New 
Masses submission since the manuscript does not feature any address or other 
contact information on its header. Print magazines (both in the 1930s and today) 
nearly universally expect submitters to include such information. 2 It is also the 
common protocol for writers to state their opinions about the work being 
submitted (for example, why “Christmas in the Workhouse” is such a great 
example of Great Britain’s contributions to world culture) on an attached cover 
letter, not paste their comments on the poem itself. Therefore, this would be an 
exceptionally amateur submission to the New Masses . Even then, Davidman 
would follow the usual protocol: mail the poem back with a rejection notice, 
using the return address listed on the submission’s postal envelope. As many of 
her letters show, Davidman never suffered fools lightly. If a writer was fool ish 
enough to submit something this badly formatted, it is hard to imagine her 
passing up the chance to cow that writer with an incendiary rejection notice. 
One of this article’s authors, Clark Sheldon, has done extensive work 
on Gresham and has his own theory about how “Christmas in the Workhouse” 
entered Gresham’s files. 
 
 
 
2 For example, the only poem in “Poems, 1941 –1944” that Gresham published, “Last 
Kilometer,” has his name and address and date added to the second draft, the version he 
presumably sent to Dial Press. 
Notes 
250  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
“CHRISTMAS IN THE WORKHOUSE” AND JOY DAVIDMAN 
When initially asked about the poem (“Funny poem from Gresham 
archives”), Sheldon noted it is hard to say from the note’s style whether 
Gresham wrote it. Gresham’s normal writing style was chatty but it changed 
whenever Gresham was researching something. Given those factors, it seems 
more likely that the “lumpenproletariat” note is something Davidman wrote or 
that Gresham wrote with her in mind. 
The second option raises a new query: what could Davidman have 
been working on which Gresham would think a profane leftwing protest poem 
was suitable for? 
Of Davidman’s projects, the most likely answer is her second poetry 
collection. War Poems contains 150 leftwing war poems from around the world, 
and “Christmas in the Workhouse” has a strong war theme, especially 
compared to Sims’ original poem. The old man in the original becomes a “war -
scarred veteran” and the line about how his “face was hard as brass” becomes a 
reference to how the veteran “Stormed the Khyber Pass.” 
“Christmas in the Workhouse” does not appear in War Poems of the 
United Nations , although two poems with similar titles are included: 
“Christmas” by Frantisek Halas (66) and “Christmas Song” by Rudolf Leonhard, 
the latter translated from German into English by Jean Star Untermeyer (122 –
23). Therefore, it is quite possible that Gresham knew Davidman was seeking 
war poems and transcribed the poem (with the perhaps tongue -in-cheek note) 
for her to use, only for Dial Press to refuse its inclusion because of its profanity. 
The fact that “Christmas in the Workhouse” is a British war poem 
makes it even more likely to be material for War Poems of the United Nations . 
According to Lyle W. Dorsett’s book And God Came In, Davidman struggled to 
find British leftwing war poems for the collection, so she wrote some poems 
herself under two British pseudonyms, Megan Coombes -Dawson and Hayden 
Weir (43; c.f. Glyer 10–11).3 Weir even got a tragic backstory: alas, he “was killed 
in action in 1942” ( War Poems 50). “Christmas in the Workhouse” not only fits 
the militaristic theme Davidman was seeking for her collection; its British origin 
filled a blatant gap in her collection. 
If “Christmas in the Workhouse” is something Gresham collected for 
Davidman to use, it presents a new direction for Davidman -Gresham 
discussions. Much has been said about Davidman influencing Gresham’s work. 
Nightmare Alley is dedicated to her. Sheldon has discussed elsewhere how much 
editorial feedback she gave on the book, how Davidman helped to create 
structure and other traits conspicuously absent from Limbo Tower  (Salter, 
 
3 The poem attributed to Coombes-Dawson is “For My Son” (War Poems 25). The two poems 
attributed to Weir are “Four Years After Munich” and “Peccavimus” (War Poems 49–51). 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  251 
“Exploring William Lindsay Gresham”). However, outside of King mentioning 
that Gresham influenced a carnival scene and an alcoholic priest character in 
Weeping Bay (Yet One More Spring  149; c.f. Out of My Bone  123), little has been 
said about Gresham influencing Davidman. “Christmas in the Workhouse” may 
be positive proof of one occasion when the influence took the other direction. 
 
FURTHER NEW DIRECTIONS FOR DAVIDMAN-GRESHAM RESEARCH 
Time will tell if new research shows how “Christmas in the 
Workhouse” made its way into Gresham’s files. As of this writing, King has 
published some of Davidman’s uncollected letters ( King, “Joy Davidman’s 
Unpublished Letters”; cf. Salter, “The Women that C.S. Lewis Loved”), which 
may open possibilities for researching War Poems  in more detail. Various 
archival projects on Gresham remain under -explored. For example, no one has 
published a collection of his letters. As noted elsewhere (Salter, “What Are 
Magic and Myth Good For?” 218), there is currently no complete bibliography 
of his published work. If either project comes to fruition, they may reveal new 
information about “Christmas in the Workhouse,” and almost certainly new 
insights into the leftwing community that fostered Davidman and Gresham as 
young writers. 
Whatever happens next with Davidman -Gresham scholarship, 
“Christmas in the Workhouse” is an entertaining read giving hints of their 
political connections and influences during an under-studied time in their lives. 
It is also well worth stating for the academic record that while Sims did 
not write this version of “Christmas in the Workhouse,” Rudyard Kipling did 
not write it either. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to Brandt & Hochman Literary Agents, Inc., for permission to print snippets 
of marginalia on Gresham’s poetry manuscripts for educational usage. While 
“Christmas in the Workhouse” is in the public domain, all of Gresham’s original 
poetry is Copyrigh t © by William Lindsay Gresham. All rights to those works are 
reserved by the Estate of William Lindsay Gresham and Brandt & Hochman Literary 
Agents, Inc. 
 
WORKS CITED 
Biosca, Maria Luisa Gonzalez, editor. The Neglected Poetry.  Publicacions de la 
Universitat de València, Kindle, 2019. 
Christopher, Joe R. “A Naked Tree: Love Sonnets to C.S. Lewis and Other Poems by 
Joy Davidman. Ed. Don W. King [Review].” Mythlore vol. 34, no. 1, #127, 
Fall/Winter 2015, pp. 179–86. 
Davidman, Joy (ed.). They Look Like Men  by Alexander F. Bergman. Bernard 
Ackerman, 1944. 
Notes 
252  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
—. War Poems of the United Nations. Dial Press, 1943.  
Dorsett, Lyle W. And God Came In: The Extraordinary Story of Joy Davidman, Her Life 
and Marriage to C.S. Lewis. Macmillan Publishing, 1983. 
The Gathering. Directed by Randal Kleiser, Hanna-Barbera Productions, 1977. 
Glyer, Diana Pavlac. “Joy Davidman Lewis: Author, Editor, and Collaborator.” 
Mythlore vol. 22, no. 2, #84, Summer 1998, pp. 10–17, 46. 
Hammond, Marie. “Joy Davidman’s Weeping Bay: An Anti -Catholic Diatribe?” The 
Faithful Imagination: Papers from the 2018 Frances White Ewbank Colloquium on 
C.S. Lewis & Friends  edited by Ashley Chu and Joe Ricke, Winged Lion Press, 
2018, pp. 235–45.  
Herrmann, Gina. “Poems of the Spanish Civil War.” The Volunteer vol. 24, no. 3, Sept. 
2002, pp. 10–11, 13. 
Jakobs, Lydia. Pictures of Poverty: The Works of George R. Sims and Their Screen 
Adaptations. John Libbey Publishing, 2021. 
King. Don W. (ed.) Out Of My Bone: The Letters of Joy Davidman  edited by Don. W. 
King. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 2009. 
—. Yet One More Spring: A Critical Study of Joy Davidman . Wm. B. Eerdmans 
Publishing Co., 2015. 
—. “Weird Davidman Research Question.” Received by G. Connor Salter. 12 Oct. 2024. 
King, Don W. (ed.) and Joy Davidman. “Joy Davidman's Unpublished Letters: 
August 16 to December 19, 1952.” Seven: An Anglo -American Literary Review , 
vol. 40, 2024, 5–62. 
Nelson, Carey (ed.) The Wound and Dream: Sixty Years of American Poems about the 
Spanish Civil War. Illinois UP, 2002. 
“Poems, 1941–1944.” William Lindsay Gresham Papers, Box 4, Folder 280. Marion E. 
Wade Center, Wheaton College, Wheaton, IL. 
Salter, G. Connor. “Beyond the ‘Last Kilometer’: William Lindsay Gresham’s Spanish 
Civil War Poetry.” The Volunteer, vol. 42, no. 1, March 2025, 16–18.  
—. “Exploring William Lindsay Gresham: Interview with Biographer Clark 
Sheldon.” Fellowship & Fairydust , 28 Feb.  2024. https://fellowdustmag. 
wordpress.com/2024/02/28/exploring-william-lindsay-gresham-interview-
with-biographer-clark-sheldon/. 
—. “Joy Davidman, William Lindsay Gresham and the American Literary Left: 
Interview with Alan M. Wald.” Fellowship & Fairydust , September 11, 2024. 
https://fellowdustmag. com/2024/09/11/joy-davidman-william-lindsay-
gresham-and-the-american-literary-left-interview-with-alan-w-wald/. 
—. “William Lindsay Gresham and Norse Poetry: A Surprising Discovery.” CSL: The 
Bulletin of the New York C.S. Lewis Society, vol. 55, no. 1, #519, Jan./Feb. 2024, pp. 8–12. 
—. “The Women that C.S. Lewis Loved: Interview with Don W. King.” Fellowship & 
Fairydust, 14 Aug. 2024. https://fellowdustmag.com/2024/08/14/joy-davidman-
ruth-pitter-cs-lewis-interview-with-don-w-king/. 
—. “What Are Magic and Myth Good For? Exploring William Lindsay Gresham’s Memories 
from Oz.” Journal of Inklings Studies vol. 14, no. 2, October 2024, pp. 201–18. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  253 
—. with Sørina Higgins. “Friar Jack, The Science -Fiction Apologist: Exploring “The 
Friar of Oxford.” Mythlore vol. 43, no. 1, #145, Fall/Winter 2024, pp. 244–63. 
Santamaria, Abigail . Joy: Poet, Seeker, and the Woman Who Captivated C. S. Lewis . 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2015. 
Sheldon, Clark. “Funny poem from Gresham archives.” Received by G. Connor 
Salter, 21 Oct. 2024. 
Sims, George Robert. “In the Workhouse. Christmas Day.” The Dagonet Ballads . 
(Chiefly from the Referee).  E.J. Francis, 1879, pp. 8 –15. Google Books , https:// 
www.google.co.uk/books/edition /The_Dagonet_Ballads/AIFKAQAAMAAJ. 
Wilkins, George Henry. Certified: An Autobiographical Study. Gollancz, 1947. 
 
G. CONNOR SALTER has a Bachelor of Science in Professional Writing from Taylor 
University. He has spoken on Inklings topics on several occasions, including “William 
Lindsay Gresham: Writer, Magician, Seeker” (November 3, 2023) and “The Lion and the 
Vampire: The Inklings a nd English Horror Films in Conversation,” (October 29, 2021), 
both for Inkling Folk Fellowship. He has contributed to many publications, including CSL: 
The Bulletin of the New York C.S. Lewis Society , The Lamp -Post, Fellowship & Fairydust, The 
Oddest Inkling , and A Pilgrim in Narnia . His recent work includes “William Lindsay 
Gresham and Norse Poetry: A Surprising Discovery,” (CSL, vol. 55, no. 1) and “Tellers of 
Dark Fairy Tales: Common Themes in the Works of C.S. Lewis and Terence Fisher” 
(Mythlore vol. 41, no. 1). 
 
CLARK SHELDON, from Winnipeg, Canada is an independent researcher working on a 
biography of WIlliam Lindsay Gresham. 
 
 
 
“PERILOUS AND FAIR” IN “A BLEAK , BARREN LAND ”: 
A FEMINIST RESPONDS TO DYLAN LEE HENDERSON ’S ESSAY  
ROBIN ANNE REID 
 
“I don’t know about perilous,” said Sam. “It strikes me that folk takes their 
peril with them into Lórien, and finds it there because they’ve brought it. 
But perhaps you could call her perilous, because she’s so strong in herself. 
You, you could dash yourself to pieces on her, like a ship on a rock; or 
drownd yourself, like a hobbit in a river. But neither rock nor river would 
be to blame.” (LotR IV.5.680, bolded emphasis added) 
 
ANET BRENNAN CROFT AND LESLIE A. DONOVAN open their joint introduction to 
the first (and so far only ) anthology on “ Women in the Works and Life of J.R.R. 
Tolkien,” with two quotes from The Lord of the Rings . The first quote is three 
J 
Notes 
254  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
paragraphs from Faramir’s and Sam’s conversation about Elves (LotR IV.5.679–
80). The second is the paragraph about Éowyn’s challenge to the Witch -king 
before she kills the Fell Beast (V.6.841). I choose to quote Sam’s insight about 
Galadriel, although I was tempted to start with Éowyn’s defiant laugh and her 
claim that “no living man am I! You look upon a woman. Éowyn I am, Éomund’s 
daughter. You stand between me and my lord and kin. Begone, if you be not 
deathless! For living or dark undead, I will smite you, if you touch him” 
(V.6.841).1 Galadriel and Éowyn are both, if differently, perilous and fair, and 
both, judging by the varied critical interpretations made about them over the 
decades, are ambiguously gendered figures.2  
 Sam’s analysis of the ambiguous nature of Galadriel’s perilousness is a 
response to Faramir’s lengthy comment about the history of declining 
interactions between Men [sic] and Elves in Middle -earth which has led him to 
conclude that: “I deem it perilous now for mortal men [sic] willfully to seek out 
the Elder People” (emphasis added). Yet Faramir’s own ambiguous feelings in 
regard to Galadriel show in his next sentence: “Yet I envy you that have spoken 
with the White Lady” ( LotR IV.5.680.679). In Faramir’s  sentence, perilous 
modifies “it” which is a dummy subject standing in for the phrase “mortal men 
[who are] willfully” searching for the Elves (“Dummy Subjects”). Faramir 
acknowledges his own longing to meet and speak with Galadriel despite the 
peril that he believes exists. Sam disclaims any authoritative knowledge about 
the perilousness of Galadriel, the individual, as opposed to that of the “Elder 
People.” In this instance, the word carries the meaning of first definition in the 
Oxford English Dictionary  (OED): “Dangerous, hazardous. . .causing or 
resulting in danger […] also: spiritually dangerous.” 3 I suspect that Galadriel’s 
 
1 Apparently male characters in Middle-earth share the all-too common assumption that 
the word “man” is deemed sufficient (mostly by men) to denotate not only male human 
beings but also covers the default “human” (which in theory should include female human 
beings, but in practice often does not)! 
2 They are arguably among the more masculine of the named female humanoid characters, 
although I would include Lobelia Sackville -Baggins in their company based on Amy 
Amendt-Raduege’s excellent essay, “Revising Lobelia,” an essay which counters the 
stereotype of Lobelia as merely a shrew: “[c]loser examination reveals that [Lobelia’s] 
character is more complex and compelling than is generally supposed. She is proud, 
stubborn, unwilling to accept less than her due, and eager to display her status to society: 
all traits commonly found in the heroes of the medieval poems and sagas that Tolkien 
so diligently studied . She is also intelligent, forthright, and capable of unexpected 
generosity” (77, bolded emphasis added).  
3 From the online OED:  
Perilous (adjective): 1.a c1300 “Dangerous, hazardous, fraught with peril; causing or 
resulting in danger; risky. In early use also: spiritually dangerous.”  
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  255 
presumed spiritual dangerousness is primarily what Faramir and other male 
characters are most concerned about. 
 Sam then shifts to using the noun peril plus adding a simile to identify 
two possible types of peril he speculates may apply to Galadriel. The first is 
internal to the men seeking her, meaning their assumptions about the nature of 
Galadriel which they project onto her. The second is external to the men who 
enter the Golden Wood: it signifies Galadriel’s o wn strength, her peril, which is 
inherent, and, additionally, in Sam’s simile, functions the same way that rocks 
in oceans and rivers do at times. Those p arts of the natural world can kill 
mortals, but neither rocks nor rivers intend to kill anyone. Sam’s choice of words 
and use of figurative language assign some level of agency to the hypothetical 
mortal males who chooses to seek out Galadriel, to sail on the ocean, or to take 
a boat out on a river in spite of, or because of, their assumptions.  
 All the named characters in the scene where the Fellowship meet 
Galadriel are male except for Galadriel herself. Aragorn is the only one who has 
visited Lothlórien previously, and many, if not all of the group, have heard the 
stories about the Golden Wood  and about the peril of Galadriel told in their 
home cultures; apparently no tales are told about Celeborn who, as an Elf Lord, 
is presumably also perilous, but, as a male, is presumably not spiritually perilous! 
All the male characters have different pers pectives and assumptions about 
Galadriel, and the ones who are later willing to describe their responses to her 
greeting and testing illustrate how different individuals respond to the same 
experience.  
 While Sam is describing an encounter between (mostly) strangers 
meeting for the first time in Tolkien’s sub-created world, I think that Sam’s first 
definition of the perceived peril of Galadriel to “mortal men” (and, presumably, 
to mortal, and male, hobbi ts and dwarves) is analogous to how some male 
readers in the Primary World project stereotypes upon women’s and/or 
feminists’ interpretations of Tolkien’s work. Unfortunately, this outdated 
 
Perilous (adverb): c1440 (c1390) “Dangerously, terrifyingly. Chiefly as an intensifier: 
greatly, excessively, very; = perilously adv. (cf. parlous adv.). Now rare (literary).” 
Peril (noun): there are five different types of definitions for the noun; three of the five fit 
with Faramir’s usage.  
1.a. ?c1225– “The position or condition of being imminently exposed to the chance of 
injury, loss, or destruction; risk, jeopardy, danger.” 
3. c1325 – “A matter of danger; a dangerous matter. Now only in it is peril : it is 
dangerous (to do something). Now archaic and rare.” 
5. a1500–00 † “Bad luck, inauspiciousness; an instance of this. days of perils: unlucky 
or inauspicious days. Cf. perilous adj. A.3. Obsolete.” 
The two definitions relating to “peril” as a verb and to “peril” as a variant of “pearl” (noun 
and adjective) are not applicable to this discussion. 
Notes 
256  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
stereotype of women and/or feminist critics as shrewish man -haters appears 
early (in the second paragraph) of Dylan Lee Henderson’s 2023 essay, “A Bleak, 
Barren Land’: Women and Fertility in The Lord of the Rings ,” and shapes his 
overall argument. He opens his two -paragraph long “Background” section, 
which serves as a basic review of literature, by saying that “many feminist 
scholars [since 1971] have condemned Tolkien’s depiction of women as inadequate 
and denounced Tolkien himself as a misogynist” (88, emphasis added). This sentence 
ends with a superscript number referencing a footnote citing my essay, “The 
History of Scholarship on Female Characters in J.R.R. Tolkien’s Legendarium: A 
Feminist Bibliographic Essay” (Croft and Donovan, Perilous and Fair 
[subsequently P&F]). The footnote reads, in its entirety: “For a more detailed 
history of this debate, see Reid” (88n2). Henderson choosing to cite my essay at 
the end of a sentence that is his own argument implies that my essay makes the 
same, or similar argument, only with more “details” about the many feminists 
who have “condemned […] and denounced Tolkien himself as a misogynist” (88).  
 While my essay does provide more details about more of the relevant 
scholarship than Henderson cites in his essay, my analysis of the scholarship 
differs a great deal from his. My goal in the essay, as with any bibliographic 
essay, is not to make an argument about Tolkien’s work (let alone the author 
himself) but to analyze the types of arguments made in the scholarship about 
his work. In order to achieve that goal, I analyze changes in the “development 
of scholarship on [Tolkien’s] female characters over time, including not only the 
increasing attention paid to these characters, but also a growing application of 
newer critical theories and methods” (13). My analysis includes, but is not 
limited to, all the essays in P&F, seven of which were reprints of earlier essays. 
But I also cover all the published essays on the topic that I could find in order to 
identify areas of agreement and of disagreement in the scholarship as well as 
gaps that needed filling. Some scholars do characterize elements of Tolkien’s 
fiction as sexist, even misogynistic, but many do not, presenting a range of 
different arguments and drawing on different critical or feminist theories. At no 
point in the essay do I use loaded language like condemn or denounce. 
 My conclusion includes a suggestion for the future of Tolkien 
scholarship on women and female characters which is to: “move beyond the 
perceived need to defend Tolkien (whether the author, the body of work, or the 
human being) from the outdated stereotype  of ‘feminist critics’ who exist only 
to rend and destroy” (39). It is frustrating to see this stereotype asserted nearly 
ten years after the publication of P&F, and even more frustrating because 
Henderson cites, in addition to my essay, seven of the fifte en chapters in the 
collection (this count includes the “Introduction”) which present a more 
complex picture of the scholarship than he conveys. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  257 
 Croft and Donovan’s argument in “Perilous and Fair, Ancient and 
Modern, Luminous and Powerful” is similar to the one I make in my essay. They 
challenge the extent to which the stereotype of feminists attacking Tolkien is a 
weakness in the critical history;  they acknowledge that some critics dismiss 
Tolkien’s fictional women as stereotypes, claiming that his work “[seems] either 
to ignore women or to place them on unattainable pedestals […] preserving 
cultural stereotypes of female roles, and reflecting ant ifeminist tendencies” (1). 
However, they point to other scholars who challenge those interpretations with 
“detailed, innovative scholarship that recognizes myriad positive contexts for 
Tolkien’s female characters and argues more nuanced understandings of 
Middle-earth’s women” (2). Acknowledging that the overall critical consensus 
tends to be “that the historical context of Tolkien’s life prevents him from being 
considered a feminist of any sort […] published discussion frequently interprets 
female characters in The Lord of the Rings  and The Silmarillion as imbued with 
unconventional power” (2). They note that the earliest critical engagement with 
the topic of “female characters” originated in the early 1970s (citing Myers’s 1971 
essay, as does Henderson, and as I did) and reflects “philosophies central to the 
United States civil rights movements of the 1960s and 1970s that inspired interest 
in marginalized fiction […] as well as new investigations of those works from 
feminist perspectives” (1). Later work, pu blished in “the twenty-first century,” 
in contrast shows that “scholars note increasingly that, where other works of 
modern fantasy or mythopoeic literature still offer fairly traditional 
presentations of female characters, Tolkien’s women highlight less common and 
more affirming positions of power” (2).4  
 Croft and Donovan also note that some recent scholarship tends to 
“echo [the stereotypical claims] from the earlier period of Tolkien scholarship,” 
rather than incorporating the different arguments from the later work. I agree 
with them that this reliance  is “troubling after so much research effort and 
printer’s ink has gone to correct similarly ill -informed positions” (2). 5 
 
4 I quote from the “Introduction” at some length to show the difference between Croft and 
Donovan’s analysis of the conflicting critical positions compared to Henderson’s claim of 
the four-decades-long feminist denunciations and attacks on Tolkien and his work that he 
follows with a brief acknowledgement in the next paragraph in which he notes the 
possibility that “Tolkien’s female characters could be both empowering and insipid  at the 
same time” (89, emphasis added). 
5 The first feminist reading of Tolkien I am aware of is Edith Crowe’s 1996 essay which 
was reprinted in P&F, “Power in Arda,” which opens with the observation that “fantasy 
readers of my generation would have had precious little to read in the beginning if we had 
limited ourselves to works fully in tune with our feminist principles” (272). Having met 
and talked with Edith, I know that we are both more or less in the same generational 
cohort, are both feminists, both read a number of the same fantasy novels (mostly by men), 
Notes 
258  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
Henderson, like the example cited by Croft and Donovan, ignores the later work 
or, if citing it, mis -represents the overall arguments and selects quotes that fit 
the stereotype. In fact, he not only ignores Croft and Donovan’s own analysis of 
the scholarship on women and Tolkien: he ignores almost half of the essays in 
P&F as well as mis-representing most of the ones he cites.6 I document examples 
of the mis-representations in a post in Writing from Ithilien, my Substack, because 
the list of examples I collected was too long to include in the published version 
of this article (“The Online Supplement”). 
 While my bibliographic essay was out of date by the time the anthology 
was published, given the schedule of academic publishing, I think it provides a 
foundation for anyone who is interested in the question of women (or female 
characters) and Tolkien and who is willing to engage in the work necessary to 
see how earlier views have been expanded by later scholarship often drawing 
on different critical theories. Reading a bibliographic essay is not equivalent to 
reading and engaging fully with the original so urces, as my comparison of 
excerpts from original sources compared to Henderson’s quoting patterns in the 
“Online Supplement” shows, but bibliographic essays are a good start for a 
research process because they provide an overview, a bibliography, and analysis 
of the discourse patterns in the published scholarship at the time of writing. The 
question then for scholars becomes the extent to which scholarship published 
after the bibliographic essay continues to reflect those patterns, and whether or 
not gaps or areas of conflict identified in the bibliographic essay have been 
addressed, and what new arguments are being made (or could still be made).  
Engaging with the scholarship in this manner does not require agreement with 
the arguments, but, as I used to t ell my students, the ethics of scholarship 
requires that they accurately summarize even those argument that they disagree 
with.7 The time I spent researching, writing, and revising that essay is why I was 
 
and both read Tolkien for the first time in the mid -1960s. She spends the next four 
paragraphs of her essay covering different definitions of “feminism,” something that 
Henderson (and many others) still fail to do. Their failure to realize that “feminism” 
includes a variety theories and praxes and consists of a centuries -long intellectual and 
political body of works that crosses national boundaries and languages and is best 
described by the plural, “feminisms,” is a significant problem.   
6 Although Henderson claims that the history of feminist denunciations goes back to 1971, 
he does not distinguish between the earliest scholarship and the later scholarship, 
completely ignoring the fact that Christopher Tolkien’s extensive posthumous 
publications of his father’s work as well as the development and circulation of later critical 
theories and methods exist. As a result, Henderson’s claim about the “history” of feminist 
attacks is ahistorical, homogeneous, and static, assuming that the only text that is relevant 
to his argument is The Lord of the Rings.  
7 While I am retired, which limits my access to the expensive subscription-only databases, 
I maintain a bibliography on feminist, gender, and queer scholarship on “Tolkien” (which 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  259 
able to immediately question Henderson’s use of selected short quotes (as 
opposed to accurate summaries of overall arguments) in support of his claim of 
a long history of feminist scholars attacking Tolkien’s work and him.  
 In the second and final paragraph of the “Background” section, 
Henderson acknowledges that some “critics have insisted that, though only a 
few female characters appear in The Lord of the Rings, they play crucial roles or, 
in some cases, act as role models” (89). This claim moderates his earliest claim 
of a history of condemnation to some extent but falls short of conveying the 
range of arguments that have been made especially at the conclusion of the 
paragraph where Henderson evaluates the two conflicting claims (“feminist 
denunciation” vs. “critics” [who may or may not be feminists?] who praise some 
of the “few female characters”) which he sees in the scholarship. Neither of the 
“antithetical” positions is “necessarily wrong,” he admits, because 
“theoretically, Tolkien’s female characters could be both empowering and insipid 
at the same time” (89, emphasis added).  
This conclusion is an insulting dismissal of work done by scholars who 
see more than Henderson does in Tolkien’s work (and who include more than 
The Lord of the Rings in their scholarship). Reducing a body of complex and often 
conflicting interpretations about female characters in the legendarium, some of 
which result from the differences in critical approaches and disciplinary 
methods chosen by the scholars, to a sexist stereotype of man-hating feminists can 
be achieved only by ignoring or dismissing the s ignificant amount of evidence 
(in hard-copy and online) from women, non -binary, agender, and even some 
men fans and scholars.  
 Henderson’s “Background” section, which are the second and third 
paragraphs of his nineteen -page essay, serves as the scholarly context which 
should provide the scholarly background that shows the originality of his 
overall argument in the essay. Henderson’s argument appears at the end of the 
first paragraph of the essay where, after emphasizing the scarcity of female 
characters and their insignificance to the plot as mere appendages to the male 
characters, he makes this claim: 
 
And yet, I would argue that the conspicuous absence of women in 
Tolkien’s epic, while potentially unsatisfying, nevertheless shapes the 
reading experience by emphasizing the threat that Sauron’s forces, with 
 
includes scholarship on his legendarium and its adaptations, transformative works, 
reception, and fandom studies) on my Substack, Writing from Ithilien , which includes 
publications through 2024. I welcome additions to the bibliography which can be made in 
the comments there, or, if you have a more complete bibliography (or annotated 
bibliography, or bibliographic essay!) on other sub-fields of Tolkien research, I would be 
happy to host it, with credit to you, as a guest post. 
Notes 
260  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
their limitless growth, pose to the Free Peoples of Middle -earth, whose 
small and masculine populations seem shockingly sterile by comparison 
(88).8  
  
The gap that Henderson perceives in the twelve publications he selected for his 
review of the scholarly literature (by thirteen writers, ten of them women) 9 is 
that they “overlook the effect that women, and their absence have on the reader 
and his [sic] conception of Middle -earth, a world that, without women and children, 
appears disturbingly sterile and depressingly barren” (89, emphasis added).  
 Neither I, nor any of the scholars whose work I am familiar with, would 
disagree with the claim that the female characters are relatively few and are 
given less narrative time (and dialogue!) than the major male characters; that 
claim has been made for decades and is hardly original. Where we would differ, 
I think, is the claim about how Tolkien’s narrative choices “shapes [our] reading 
experience[s]” and our perceptions about Middle -earth (specifically that it is 
“disturbingly sterile and depressingly bar ren”), and the lack of evidence for 
anyone beyond Henderson and his hypothetical (ungenerous and male) readers 
sharing that perception. In addition, the use of the word “barren” as a metaphor 
for sterility not only has extremely negative denotations and co nnotations but 
was also historically more likely to be applied to the woman in a marriage who 
was assumed to be at fault; this assumption is yet another sexist stereotype. 10 
The problem of what specialists now call the “infertility stigma” that women 
 
8 In “A Bleak, Barren Take: A Response to “Women and Fertility in The Lord of the Rings,” 
Clare Moore and Leah Hagan rightfully identify the racist connections between 
Henderson’s claim about the fertility of the Orcs compared to that of the White Free 
Peoples, an ideology which:  
still persists in some dimensions of society today (for example, the stereotypes of the 
“welfare queen” or “anchor babies”) and, at its worst, forms part of the central tenet of the 
false White supremacist belief known as the Great Replacement, a conspirac y theory that 
believes that the immigration of people of color into a country will “replace” White people 
and their position of power […]. Great Replacement ideology has influenced violent actions, 
from the events in Charlottesville in 2017 to Christchurch, New Zealand, in 2019 […], hence 
the danger of it going unacknowledged in a peer-reviewed essay. (231) 
9 The two men are Kenneth McLeish (1983) and Sam McBride who is the co -author with 
Candice Frederick of Women Among the Inklings (2001).  
10 A quick search of the essay shows that the word “sterile” is used four times; “sterility,” 
three times; “barren” appears four times (excluding the twelve times it appears in the title 
which is repeated on multiple pages), and “barrenness” six times. Femal e characters are 
never described as sterile: they are barren, as is the land/world of Middle -earth. The 
accuracy of this claim is also dubious since a number of the female characters have had 
children, or go on to have children after the end of the novel (described in the Appendices); 
somehow, these characters just do not count since there are no babies described in the 
present of the narrative. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  261 
still experience today reflects the negative history of the word (Taebi et al.). 
Given how recent findings on the “’urgent, global’ crisis of [dropping] sperm 
counts” (Hunt) have drawn attention to the diminishment of male fertility, it is 
worth asking why Henderson’s judgement is so gendered, especially in how 
Henderson describes Goldberry (and by implication other female characters)  11 
as being solely responsible for the world’s sterility: “And yet, while Goldberry 
differs from Arwen and Galadriel, she, incredibly, has no children. The 
importance of this can hardly be overstated: Tolkien’s living symbol of feminine 
domesticity is, unless recently married, presumably sterile” (97). 
 There is, of course, no way to diagnose a fictional character’s 
reproductive capabilities, or lack of them, because they are only words on a page 
to be interpreted by readers (who will bring very different experiences to the 
reading) but if the lack of na med characters who are identified as the children 
of Goldberry and Tom is to be declared a problem, I would like to argue that it 
is equally possible to assume that Tom, who is self -described as “old. Eldest 
that’s what I am,” who came into the world “befo re the seas were bent. […] 
before the Dark Lord came from Outside” (LotR I.7.131), has a low sperm count 
due to his immense age (Harris et al., Hunt). There is only one male character 
associated with “sterility”: in Henderson’s last paragraph, he describes Frodo at 
the end of the novel as “[remaining] apart, a relic of sterility in a now-bountiful 
world” (103).12   
 Additionally, Henderson’s claim that none of the existing scholarship 
has noticed what he has, that the scarcity and barrenness of female characters 
(and the resulting lack of their children) creates a “conception of Middle -earth 
[as] disturbingly sterile and depressingly barren” (89), is inaccurate. I know of 
one essay by a woman scholar who analyzes a very different effect that the few 
female characters in the novel have upon at least one other reader’s perceptions 
of the land in Middle-earth in which they live: Maria Błaszkiewicz’s 2013 essay, 
 
11 Éowyn, although not married, is described as “young and beautiful and very human, 
[but] she, too, is sterile —psychologically” (97). I have a number of problems with 
Henderson’s reading of Éowyn which, because of the length needed to deal with them, 
are be ing developed elsewhere with some preliminary work done in my personal 
Substack (“Éowyn as An Exemplar”). 
12 While Henderson describes the world of Men, Dwarves, Ents, and Elves as sterile (102), 
he does not acknowledge that Tolkien’s description of the Shire, the number of children 
that Hobbit families tended to have, and the evidence of the genealogies in the Appendices 
make it clear that the Hobbits were an extremely fecund group before the discovery and 
destruction of the One Ring as well as after. I will also note that essays using queer 
approaches foreground how Bilbo and Frodo, as never -married and childne ss, are 
considered “queer” by the majority of the Hobbits around them. For an excellent 
discussion of just how often the word “queer” is applied to Bilbo and Frodo, see Kisor. 
 
Notes 
262  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
“Tolkien’s Queen-Women in The Lord of the Rings ,” which I summarize in my 
bibliographic essay in P&F. Her argument differs from Henderson’s (and a 
number of other scholarly publications) because she criticizes the scholarly 
tendency to read:  
 
the scarcity of female characters in Tolkien’s work as a sign of sexism or 
lack of authorial skill; instead, she argues that Tolkien’s choice is “ a 
conscious design which aims not to diminish the importance of the female 
element but, on the contrary to glorify it”  […]. Błaszkiewicz argues that 
Tolkien’s careful construction of female characters associated solely with 
one specific type of sanctuary, places safe from evil (as opposed to resting 
places where characters may still be at risk), is an important th ematic 
element. These “omphalic spaces” associated with a female character 
range from Farmer Maggot’s house to Lórien and are contrasted with the 
dying and wasted lands in areas where no female characters are present. 
She concludes that “Tolkien’s design in The Lord of the Rings  has been to 
highlight the exceptional and royal function of a woman, a source of life in all its 
senses” (Reid, “History of Scholarship, Tolkien” 36–37, emphasis added).13 
  
 Clearly, Błaszkiewicz, who has a positive interpretation of the impact 
of Tolkien’s female characters, is neither Henderson’s default male reader, nor 
is she at all similar to his hypothetical “ungenerous reader [who] might say, not 
entirely without justification, that most of Tolkien’s women belong to one of two 
types: the shrew and the goddess” (88, emphasis added). 14 Henderson does not 
 
13 I do not agree with her overall argument, any more than I do with Henderson’s, because 
both rely upon the same sexist stereotype, that women’s most important function is 
bearing children, and the failure to bear children (barrenness) has cultural signific ance 
beyond their personal experiences. While it would be interesting to compare similarities 
and differences between the two essays, their overall arguments, and the range of evidence 
chosen, that comparison is outside the scope of this response.  
14 This unsupported and, I would say, ungenerous, assertion is one example of a number 
of derogatory claims about female characters that are scattered throughout the essay. 
These claims are never attributed to a published source, so, presumably, they come fr om 
the ungenerous readers Henderson projects. They are presented as unchallenged, and thus 
as (implied) facts or some universal consensus instead of debatable claims that must be 
supported by evidence. They include:   
“Arwen, for example, exists as an extension of Aragorn’s character in much the same way 
that, to put it bluntly, Farmer Maggot’s dogs are an extension of his.” (87) 
“Galadriel, beautiful though she may be, is also ancient, and her children grown.” (96) 
“These female characters [Galadriel and Arwen] may be goddesses, but they are not fertility 
goddesses, and their beauty, though stunning, does not suggest youth or maternity.” (96)  
“When Éowyn disguises herself as Dernhelm and, abandoning her people, follows the king 
to war, she has not simply rejected a social role that does not appeal to her: she has 
endangered lives so that she may revel in slaughter. […] [N]othing reinforces the 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  263 
cite Błaszkiewicz’s reading of female characters and their relationship with the 
land in his essay which allows him to avoid having to refute her argument which 
does not fit into the patterns he describes in his “Background” paragraphs. 
However, his failure to acknowledge her work exists is not unique. Scholarship 
analyzing academic citation practices shows a systemic pattern of excluding of 
women’s work (Healy, and Savonick and Davidson). This sort of exclusion, the 
refusal to see or to acknowledge the many readers who love to read and engage 
with Tolkien’s work in ways that challenge such stereotyping, affects the quality 
and development of scholarship and makes it difficult to create spaces for 
exploring complicated questions about how to define the different categories, or 
types, of sexisms or misogynies, let alone the different types of feminisms which 
exist; how it may be possible for a work of literature to contain both feminist 
and misogynistic elements; and how systems of oppression intersect! 15 
 However, there are signs that the scholarship o n Tolkien’s work is 
beginning to acknowledge the extent to which contradictory readings of 
Tolkien’s work co -exist (in academia, popular culture, and fandom). Those 
contradictions are increasingly supported by the evidence from the posthumous 
publications that Christopher Tolkien began making available in 1977 (the 
publication date of The Silmarillion). As Verlyn Flieger points out in “The Arch 
and the Keystone”: 
 
We have pasted labels on [Tolkien], called him a medievalist, a modernist, 
a post -modernist, a royalist, a fascist, a misogynist, a feminist, a racist, an 
egalitarian, a realist, a romantic, an optimist, a pessimist. He’s been variously 
characterized as homophobic and homo-social in both work and life. His fiction 
has been interpreted as Boethian, Manichean, Augustinian and Aquinian.  
He’s been typed as a radical and a conservative, a Christian apologist and a 
pagan, a Catholic who believed in Fairyland, a m onarchist who exalted little 
people, a Tory whose political views leaned toward anarchy  […]. The fact that 
all these labels can find a fit only adds to the confusion (6, emphasis 
added). 
 
 
impression of barrenness that hangs over the novel like her shocking preference for war 
and death.” (98–99) 
“Sam, of course, finds Rosie Cotton, whose very name evokes images of blood -stained 
underwear and bedsheets and, by extension, menstruation and the tearing of the 
hymen.” (102) 
15 As an intersectional feminist, I know there are major unasked questions about the 
heteronormative Whiteness of the “perilous and fair” female characters in Tolkien’s 
legendarium that are worth exploring; see Redmond for a start. However, that topic 
deserves much more space and thought than can fit into this response. 
Notes 
264  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
And it is these same forces creating this same friction that invite the 
disagreeing and debating Tolkien scholars and critics to find in Tolkien’s 
work what they are looking for.  I am not saying they’re wrong . I’m saying 
they’re right. What they see is there, even when they’re seeing contradictory 
things (16, emphasis added).  
 
Flieger’s argument is supported by extensive textual analysis from 
across Tolkien’s legendarium showing the extent of his contradictory statements 
in his fiction and nonfiction.  Even more evidence of the impact of Tolkien’s 
contradictory statements on the state of Tolkien scholarship is provided in 
Flieger’s earlier essay about how scholars have ignored contradictions in what 
Tolkien says about religion (“But What Did  He Really Mean?”), contradictions 
which have resulted in Christian and Pagan scholars cherry-picking some of the 
same quotes to support their argument about Tolkien’s religious ideas and to, 
in effect, claim “Tolkien” for their side.  
The existence of Tolkien’s contradictory statements, leading to 
conflicting interpretations, is something I think Tolkien scholars should, ideally, 
keep in mind when presenting their own interpretative claims in the context of 
the relevant published scholarship. To do so requires critical thought about what 
specific evidence is given by scholars to support their claims as well as following 
Flieger’s advice to keep in mind that analysis of evidence from the edited, 
selected, published letters must take into consideration elements such as the 
date of composition and the specific correspondent Tolkien addresses.  
While Flieger notes that one of the many contradictory interpretations 
about Tolkien’s work, and about him, is that of “misogynist vs. feminist,” she 
does not explore that conflict in either of her two essays, being more interested 
in the “Christian vs. pagan” conflict in “But What Did He Really Mean.” In “The 
Arch and the Keystone,” a published version of her Guest of Honor presentation 
at Mythcon, written to be delivered to an in-person audience, she cannot stop to 
provide detailed examples of all the con flicting interpretations she identifies. 
Because the purpose of her argument in the talk is not to “prove” one side or the 
other correct but to argue that there is evidence in Tolkien’s work for both (and 
more varied) interpretations, I do not think her es say is weaker for that focus; 
instead, she sets up a number of intriguing questions for us to explore.  
I am one of a number of scholars in Tolkien studies (many of whom I 
know personally) who define ourselves as feminists. Building on the fifty-three 
years of work exploring the questions around Tolkien’s female characters, we 
are currently in the process of considering not only Tolkien’s own publications, 
but the growing number of adaptations of his work and how actual readers, not 
the hypothetical/default readers imagined by many scholars, respond to his 
work. For instance, Dawn Walls -Thumma has been runnin g an online 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  265 
longitudinal study of Tolkien fans for almost twenty years. Her work is available 
in Cultus Dispatches at the Silmarillion Writers’ Guild. Walls-Thumma is the one 
of the few Tolkien scholars I know of who has done quantitative scholarship on 
Tolkien fandom, and the only one who has administered surveys over time. In 
her column on the demographic data she collected, she notes a change between 
the 2015 and the 2020 surveys: “The two surveys had 1,052 [2015] and 746 [2020] 
valid responses. The 2015 survey collected some demographic data; the 2020 
survey collected more.”  In regard to gender, in the 2015 survey , 89% of the 
respondents were women, 6% were non -binary; 4% were men. In 2020, while 
73% of the respondents were women, the significant demographic change was 
not a major increase in the number of men writing, but in the number of 
nonbinary respondents: 15% were non-binary, and 7% were men.16 
When I first read The Lord of the Rings  in 1965, I was told by my peers 
and the adults around me that “girls don’t read science fiction or fantasy” 
apparently because we are girls. 17 I did not consider myself a feminist until my 
late twenties, but even at age of ten I rejected any attempt to tell me what I could 
or could not read. I was in love with Éowyn and with Middle -earth. I still am. 
As a childfree woman who decided not to marry or have children when I was 
ten, I never noticed or particularly cared about whether the female characters 
had babies. Decades later, I incorporated my queer reader response to her in my 
essay on “Female Bodies and Femininities”:  
 
The author Tolkien constructed Éowyn to serve his purpose in his 
narrative, but her development through multiple revisions is complex. 
His very obvious dislike of the concept of a woman picking up arms to 
fight as men do is clear; yet he is the sub-creator who showed her voicing 
that impassioned statement to Aragorn criticizing his, and the Rohirrim, 
attitudes about women who are denied the chance for battle but can still 
be killed after the battle is lost. She fears a cage—bars that keep her from 
doing great deeds […]. She expresses herself in the language of the heroic 
epic because that is the language she has; that is the language of her 
people and culture. Tolkien’s own work revises the epic heroic model by 
embedding later, Christian, elements, but it is  equally possible for a 
reader of Tolkien’s work to read in sympathy with Éowyn and against 
 
16 I participated in the most recent survey. 
17 I was ten. Neither my peers nor the adults thought they needed to give any reasons for 
this claim although perhaps they considered the proof to be self -evident because of the 
nature of sexism in small-town Idaho in 1965. The only result of this directive was to add 
some additional evidence of my not being “normal.” Luckily for me, my father was an SFF 
fan and encouraged my reading (including providing multiple trips to the public library). 
I have never denied that some women and some feminists do not like Tolkien/see his work 
as sexist; however, some feminists are #notallfeminists.  
Notes 
266  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
the grain of her sub -creator who once planned for her death because of 
her masculine qualities. Such a reader can imagine much more in the 
character than the author could show directly. There are gaps in every 
text, and the gaps in this text are large enou gh to allow for a queer 
reading. (Reid, “Light” 109–110). 
 
Now, in 2025, sixty years after first falling in love with The Lord of the Rings, I am 
beyond tired of reading or hearing variations on the over-generalized claim that 
feminists/women/girls don’t like/don’t read Tolkien’s work, or don’t like/hate 
Tolkien, because sexism, a claim which is often presented as self -evident to the 
(often but not always) male authority.  
Years ago, when I first read Edith Crowe’s feminist essay, “Power in 
Arda: Sources, Uses and Misuses,” I was so pleasantly surprised by the scope 
and feminism of her analysis that I wrote her a fan email! I consider her essay to 
be the first academic feminist essay on Tolkien (“feminist” meaning, written by 
someone who is willing to state she is a feminist and who uses feminist theories). 
Her conclusion is one that opens up the possibility of dialogue and engagement, 
rather than closing it off. I consider C rowe’s essay to be required reading for 
anybody who wants to make any argument about “feminist readers” of Tolkien: 
 
This, then, is why I conclude that a person of feminist persuasion, while 
not necessarily agreeing with Tolkien’s attitudes in toto, can find much to 
appreciate in his work. Arda is a world in which females share power in 
spiritual and temporal realms, although not always to the degree one 
might wish. More importantly, it is a world in which attitudes and 
values associated in the Primary World with the feminine are highly 
valued. Indeed, these “feminine” values triumph at the end of the Third 
Age, though no t always incarnate in female bodies.  Though Tolkien’s 
road was his interpretation of Christianity, and Eisler’s (and mine) our 
interpretation of feminism, the destination seems to have a great deal 
in common. Our mutual task in the Fourth Age is to resist the temptation 
to divide and dominate, whether we characterize this misuse of power as 
that of the Blade or the Ring. May Varda look with favour upon our 
efforts (from 1996 Mythlore, 277, bold emphasis added).  
 
Henderson paraphrases one small aspect of Crowe’s overall argument in the 
second paragraph of his “Background” section: “Edith L. Crowe notes that, 
while Tolkien divides the masculine and the feminine into different spheres, he 
does not denigrate the femin ine or prize the former over the latter, ‘ their 
relationship [being] one of linking, not ranking’  (89).” The partial quote Henderson 
includes in his paragraphs occurs three pages before the concluding paragraph 
I excerpt above. His single sentence does not mis-represent one of her arguments 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  267 
(as I argue is the case for some of his other choices and document in “The Online 
Supplement18), but a comparison of her original with his paraphrase shows that 
he fails to accurately convey her overall argument about feminist readers and 
the common ground we may find with Christian readers.  
 My exhaustion with the problem that Henderson is the latest example 
of is one of the reasons I began writing feminist and queer scholarship about 
Tolkien’s legendarium (and about the works of other fantasy writers, especially 
a number of the women who ack nowledge Tolkien’s influence on their fantasy 
and whose work is, in my reading of it, not only transformative of Tolkien but 
critically engaged with different feminist theories). I also began writing feminist 
bibliographies because of the significant incre ase in published Tolkien 
scholarship during the 21st century, a growth many of us credit to the release of 
Peter Jackson’s films (Fimi 200). I think it impossible to read, or create, a 
comprehensive bibliography or complete analysis of the past seventy yea rs of 
publications which means that there will always be choices made to exclude 
some publications. Since my experience leads me to believe that scholarship by 
women (or about feminist topics) which interest me greatly is more likely to be 
excluded, I thought it a useful project (Reid “History of Scholarship, Tolkien”; 
Reid “History of Scholarship, Bujold”). I am grateful to Janet and Leslie who 
allowed and encouraged me in my first attempt to develop this approach. 
 My bibliographies are feminist because they are written by “a feminist 
academic trained in cultural studies,” not because “the scholarship is defined as 
feminist, or written by self -identified feminists (although some is), or is even 
limited to authors wh o identify as women” (“History of Scholarship, Tolkien” 
13). At no time do I make any argument regarding Tolkien’s personal feelings 
about women; in fact, I am not interested in the question of Tolkien’s own 
feelings or attitudes about women, or about “feminism” (especially if there is no 
definition of the word provided). I have no interest in trying to write 
biographical scholarship, or to do some version of analyzing his 
feelings/ideas/intent (as opposed to some limited analysis of his writing which 
can i nclude quotes from his letters). Instead, I would rather write about his 
work, about how his work has been received and understood over the decades 
I have lived through, and about the fans and scholars now living who are 
creating new interpretations of his work, especially those of us who apparently 
are not supposed to exist, or at least, should not expect to be seen while existing.  
 
 
 
18 In my Online Supplement, I compare the original sources to Henderson’s use of them 
and then provide excerpts from my bibliographic essay that he cites, misleadingly, on his 
first page.  
Notes 
268  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
WORKS CITED 
Amendt-Raduege, Amy. “Revising Lobelia.” Tolkien and Alterity , edited by 
Christopher Vaccaro and Yvette Kisor, Palgrave, 2017, pp. 77–93.  
Błaszkiewicz, Maria. “Tolkien’s Queen -Women in The Lord of the Rings .” ‘O, What a 
Tangled Web’: Tolkien and Medieval Literature, a View from Poland , edited by 
Barbara Kowalik, Walking Tree Press, 2013, pp. 69–91.  
Croft, Janet Brennan, and Leslie Donovan, editors.  Perilous and Fair: Women in the 
Works and Life of J.R.R. Tolkien. Mythopoeic Press, 2015. 
Crowe, Edith L. “Power in Arda: Sources, Uses and Misuses.” Mythlore, vol. 21, no. 
2, #80, 1996, pp. 272–77. (Rpt. in Croft and Donovan, pp. 136–149.) 
“Dummy Subjects.” Writing Resources, Brandeis University. 
https://www.brandeis.edu/writing-program/resources/faculty/handouts/dummy-
subject.html#:~:text=Defining%20the%20Dummy%20Subject,it%20is%2C%20and
%20it%20was. 
Fimi, Dimitra. Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits. Palgrave, 2009. 
Flieger, Verlyn. “The Arch and the Keystone.” Mythlore, vol. 38, no. 1, #135, 2019, pp. 7– 19.  
—. “But What Did He Really Mean?” Tolkien Studies, vol. 11, 2014, pp. 149–166. 
Fredrick, Candice and Sam McBride. Women Among the Inklings, Gender, C.S. Lewis, 
J.R.R. Tolkien, and Charles Williams. Praeger, 2001. 
“The ‘Great Replacement Theory,’ Explained.” National Immigration Forum.   
https://immigrationforum.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/Replacement-
Theory-Explainer-1122.pdf. 
Harris, Isiah D., et al. “Fertility and the Aging Male.”  Reviews in Urology vol. 13, no. 
4, 2011, pp. 184–90, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3253726/. 
Healy, Kieran. “Gender and Citation in Four General -Interest Philosophy Journals, 
1993–2013.” Kieran Healy. 25 Feb. 2015. https://kieranhealy.org/blog/archives/ 
2015/02/25/gender-and-citation-in-four-general-interest-philosophy-journals-
1993-2013/.  
Henderson, Dylan L. “‘A Bleak, Barren Land’: Women and Fertility in The Lord of the 
Rings.” Mythlore, vol. 42, no. 1, #143, 2023, pp. 87–106.  
Hunt, Elle. “There’s a crisis in male fertility. But you wouldn’t know it from the way 
many men behave.” Guardian, 12 Mar. 2024,  https://www.theguardian.com/ 
commentisfree/2024/mar/12/men-fertility-falling-sperm-counts-conceive-problem 
Kisor, Yvette. “‘We Could Do with a Bit More Queerness in These Parts’: An Analysis 
of the Queer against the Peculiar, the Odd, and the Strange in The Lord of the 
Rings," Journal of Tolkien Research , vol.  16, iss. 1, article 4, 2023 . 
https://scholar.valpo.edu/journaloftolkienresearch/vol16/iss1/4. 
McLeish, Kenneth. “The Rippingest Yarn of All.” J.R.R. Tolkien: This Far Land Giddings, 
edited by Robert Giddings, Vision P and Barnes and Noble, 1983, pp. 125–136.  
Moore, Clare, and Leah Hagan. “A Bleak, Barren Take: A Response to ‘Women and 
Fertility in The Lord of the Rings.’” Mythlore, vol. 43, iss. 1, #145, pp. 227–234.  
Myers, Doris T. “Brave New World: The Status of Women According to Tolkien, 
Lewis, and Williams.” Cimarron Review, vol. 17, 1971, pp. 13–19. 
Notes 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  269 
“Peril.” Oxford English Dictionary, https://www.oed.com/dictionary/.  
“Perilous.” Oxford English Dictionary, https://www.oed.com/dictionary/.  
Redmond, Sean. “The Whiteness of the Ring.” The Persistence of Whiteness: Race and 
Contemporary Hollywood, edited by Daniel Bernardi, Routledge, 2008, pp. 91–101. 
Reid, Robin Anne. “Bibliography: Feminist/Gender/Queer Tolkien Scholarship 
(1971–present).” Writing from Ithilien . Substack, 25 Nov. 2023, 
https://robinareid.substack.com/p/bibliography-feministgenderqueer. 
—. “The History of Scholarship on Female Characters in J.R.R. Tolkien’s 
Legendarium: A Feminist Bibliographic Essay.” Perilous and Fair: Women in the 
Works and Life of J.R.R. Tolkien , edited by Janet Brennan Croft and Leslie A. 
Donovan, Mythopoeic Press, 2015, pp. 13–40.  
—. “The History of Scholarship on Lois McMaster Bujold’s Science Fiction and 
Fantasy: A Feminist Bibliographic Essay.” Biology and Manners: Essays on the 
Worlds and Works of Lois McMaster Bujold, Lee, Regina Yung and Una 
McCormack, eds., PUB, 2020, pp. 13–31. 
—. “Light (noun, 1) or Light (adjective, 14b)? Female Bodies and Femininities in The 
Lord of the Rings. ” The Body in Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on Middle -earth 
Corporeality, edited by Christopher Vaccaro, McFarland, 2013, pp. 98–118. 
Savonick, Danica, and Cathy N. Davidson. “Gender Bias in Academe: An Annotated 
Bibliography of Important Recent Studies.” Hastac. 27 Feb.  2017. 
https://www.hastac.org/blogs/superadmin/2015/01/26/gender-bias-academe-
annotated-bibliography-important-recent-studies.  
Taebi, Mahboubeh, et. al. “Infertility Stigma: A Qualitative Study on Feelings and 
Experiences of Infertile Women.” International Journal of Fertility and Sterility , 
vol. 15, no 3, 2021, pp. 189–196. https://doi.org/ 10.22074%2FIJFS.2021.139093.1039. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. The Lord of the Rings. Harper Collins, 2004.  
—. The Silmarillion. Edited by Christopher Tolkien. William Morrow, 2022. 
Walls-Thumma, Dawn. “Fanworks  Tagged with Cultus Dispatches,” Silmarillion 
Writers’ Guild.  https://www.silmarillionwritersguild.org/cultus-dispatches. 
—. “Who Are We? Tolkien Fanfiction and Demographics.” Cultus Dispatches , 
Silmarillion Writers’ Guild, 24 Sept. 2022, https://www.silmarillion 
writersguild.org/node/5966. 
 
ROBIN A. REID is an independent scholar whose current projects include two anthologies 
which are forthcoming in 2026. The first is co -edited with Christopher Vaccaro and 
Stephen Yandell, “There are many paths to tread”: Queer Approaches to Tolkien’s Middle-earth, 
and the second is Race, Racisms, and Racists: Essays on J. R. R. Tolkien’s Legendarium, 
Adaptations, and Readers. Her current project is a monograph on the feminist receptions of 
Tolkien’s legendarium, working title, The Web of Women. Posts relating to that project can 
be found at Writing from Ithilien, her Substack. 
 
 

 
270  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
                         EVIEWS  
 
 
  
 
 
J.R.R.  TOLKIEN : A VERY SHORT INTRODUCTION . Matthew Townend. 
Oxford UP, 2024. 160 p. 9780192882042. $12.99 
 
OMING IN AT JUST OVER ONE HUNDRED PAGES , Matthew Townend’s J.R.R. 
Tolkien: A Very Short Introduction may be concise, but it is a well-researched, 
clearly written and engaging analysis of one of the twentieth century’s most 
creative and original writers. While Townend’s focus is (not surprisingly) on The 
Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings —what he calls two of the most frequently re -
read books today —analyses of Tolkien’s other lesser -known works, including 
academic writings and work that was posthumously published, are effectively 
integrated alongside the discussion. This recently included publication in the 
Very Short Introduction series is overdue (there was a C.S. Lewis VSI in 2019) but 
is a welcome addition to Tolkien Studies. I can see this VSI being particularly 
valuable for new readers of Tolkien who want to learn more about him and his 
writing, and for students who want a compact guide through Tolkien’s major 
concerns. This would thus make an excellent resource for teachers and 
professors seeking to introduce Tolkien to new readers.  
Townend takes a thematic approach rather than a chronological review 
of Tolkien’s major writings, and so the book is structured into eight chapters that 
are arranged to explore recurring ideas in his body of work: 1) Reading Tolkien 
2) Life and work 3) Sto ries 4) Faërie 5) Language 6) Sources 7) Middle -earth 8) 
Elegy. The first chapter is essentially a brief introduction or preface that sets out 
the wide -ranging effect of Tolkien’s work. Townend notes that for many 
readers, The Lord of the Rings  offers an e xperience of re -enchantment, opening 
the door to a world of myth, folklore, and fairy tale; for other readers, 
encountering Tolkien’s world has led to an environmental awakening, or a 
newfound interest in language, or a renewed appreciation for art and cra ft, or 
has heightened their sense of justice for the small and often overlooked. 
Comparing Tolkien to other cultural phenomena like The Beatles or Star Wars, 
Townend argues, as many other scholars have, that Tolkien has “permanently 
altered the forms and f lavours of popular culture” across several media —"not 
just fiction, with the explosion of the fantasy genre that followed in his wake,” 
but in music, gaming, and film and television (2).  
C 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  271 
The second chapter, “Life and work,” begins with a brief biography of 
Tolkien that effectively summarizes the key events in his life. Townend then 
offers a response to the question “What sort of a person was Tolkien”? by noting 
some character traits that e merge from comments both from people who knew 
him personally and from those who have studied him closely: he was “quite 
diffident” though “he could grow animated in conversation”; he was a 
“dedicated and affectionate family man” and someone who had a great love for 
the natural world; in terms of his politics he is best described as conservative but 
“with a fascinating admixture of the liberal and even radical”; he was both a 
procrastinator and a perfectionist to the point where he was a “chronic non -
finisher of tasks;” he was sociable and yet independent, and often dealt with a 
lack of confidence in his work (10). Like most people, Townend concludes, “he 
was complex and contradictory” (10). An interesting observation Townend 
makes here is that Tolkien’s deep Catholic faith gave him a consciousness of his 
own weakness that was reinforced by his experience in the First World War, 
from which he emerged with a sharp sense of his own moral limitations, in terms 
of both courage and endurance (10). This is a useful biographical insight that 
helps in framing what Tolkien is doing with his hobbit characters, in whom both 
courage and endurance are so memorably manifested.  
Townend also emphasizes that although to many readers today 
Tolkien might look like a conventional and stereotypical Oxford don, it is 
important to remember that while he did spend thirty -five years in the 
professoriate, Tolkien always retained a sense of himself as an outsider and 
possessed “a warm sympathy for other outsiders”: he had been an orphan, he 
had known poverty, he was born outside of England, his wife Edith was 
illegitimate, and he experienced prejudice as a result of his Catholicism (11). 
Tolkien was also not a professional writer —he wrote as a hobby, in his spare 
time, and was only tenuously connected to the literary world of publishers, 
prizes, and periodicals. He didn’t write book reviews, and The Lord of the Rings 
itself became an unplanned, unexpected success through word -of-mouth, from 
the ground up because of actual readers, not as the result of a media campaign. 
Thus, Townend concludes that while Tolkien’s works have been “canonized,” 
at this point, “this has be en a movement from below, by millions of readers” 
(16). 
Chapter Three, entitled “Stories,” offers a valuable look at the tension 
in Tolkien between storytelling and world -building. Townend states that 
Tolkien was “above all a storyteller,” whose first instinct was towards narrative, 
rather than towards analysis (21). Townend rightly points out that these are two 
distinct modes of creativity, and that in Tolkien, the dynamic between story -
making and system-making was a wellspring of imaginative energy and helped 
generate some of his most beloved and mysterious ch aracters, like Gollum and 
Reviews 
272  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
Beorn, who both initially arose out of Tolkien’s story -making impulse in The 
Hobbit but then, later, in The Lord of the Rings are given further back stories and 
explication. He argues that as Tolkien aged, he was increasingly inclined 
towards system-making, and that this is one of the major reasons he was unable 
to complete the Silmarillion or bring together the body of legends he had been 
working on for nearly sixty years into an integrated whole. Tolkien was a 
literary pioneer, who brought together genres that had not before been 
combined in the way that he brought them together. So, for i nstance, aspects 
from fairy tale and aspects from realist fiction cohere in The Lord of the Rings and 
in The Hobbit  (where Bilbo is a modern interloper into a legendary world, 
wearing a waistcoat and possessing “trousers with pockets”) and this 
innovation was one of his greatest sources of difficulty (32). In The Hobbit, says 
Townend, no reader weeps when the fairy -tale-like goblins have their heads 
chopped off; but in the more realist The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien could not help 
taking seriously questions about the origins of orcs, or whether they had free 
will, or whether Morgoth was really able to create them. In effect, questions like 
this over which Tolkien hesitated led to an attempt to rationalize and explain 
the mythic content of the legendarium, a process that sometimes threatened to 
disenchant his tales of the very quality his younger self had so valued —the 
quality of Faërie (36). In a time when what audiences have come to call “world-
building” is ever more foregrounded in contemporary fantasy, Townend’s 
insights here are timely.  
Chapter Four, “Faërie,” treats the specific nature of the enchantment 
that Tolkien most sought to convey in his writing. Here, Townend appropriately 
begins with an overview of “On Fairy -stories” and proceeds to outline how 
Tolkien’s theories are born out i n the praxis of his primary texts, particularly 
those that lean towards fairy -story. Tolkien claims in his essay that one of the 
most profound longings of the human heart that fairy tales satisfy is the “desire 
to converse with other living things,” and Townend shows how talking animals 
are found frequently in Tolkien’s early works, from Tevildo the Prince of Cats, 
to Roverdandom, to Roäc the raven in The Hobbit. Tolkien argues in “On Fairy-
stories” that stories primarily concerned with fairies, or with elves, are as a rule 
not very interesting, but that “most good ‘fairy stories’ are about the aventures 
of men in the Perilous Realm or upon its shadowy marches”; this mortal desire 
to encounter fairies is a constant motif in Tolkien’s works, Townend emphasizes, 
from the first writings in The Book of Lost Tales  that feature Eriol, later Ælfwine 
or “elf -friend” travelling to Tol Eresesëa, to the later tales of mortal men like 
Beren, Túrin, and Tuor (39). 
“Language” is the title and subject of the fifth chapter, and here 
Townend’s expertise in Old Norse and his interests in medievalism and 
philology allow him to offer a concise but very useful overview of Tolkien’s 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  273 
linguistic aesthetics and the multilinguistic character of the legendarium. While 
there exist many treatments of Tolkien’s use of Quenya and Noldorin/Sindarin, 
Townend points out that in The Lord of the Rings we encounter other languages 
as well, including Dwarvish or Khuzdul, Entish, and the “Black Speech” of 
Mordor, as well as background hints as to the language of Númenor (Adûnaic) 
brought to Middle -earth from Númenórean exiles, that eventually became 
“Westron” or “Common Speech.” Middle-earth is “thus a multilingual world,” 
and Tolkien’s stories are “filled with moments of bilingualism, translation, 
language contact, and diglossia (that is, language -switching according to 
context)—in addition to discourses on linguistic history” (57 –58). This leads 
Townend to a discussion of the issue of translation, and the way Tolkien draws 
on different framing devices for his stories, beginning with the wanderer Eriol 
in The Book of Lost Tales, that remained a core aspect of Tolkien’s mythology for 
many decades and led him to present his fictional texts as ancient stories he had 
translated rather than invented. While this posed increasingly complicated 
problems for Tolkien, it was also in many ways “a brilliant conceit,” according 
to Townend, and superbly carried out by  an author who was uniquely poised 
to do so.  
The sixth chapter, “Sources,” begins with a treatment of modern 
medievalism, and the way Tolkien’s use of source material was revolutionary: 
unlike so many other writers who are unconsciously influenced by their 
reading, Tolkien’s creative process involved  a very deliberate act of adoption 
and adaptation. He was making “a new kind of literature out of medieval 
ingredients,” not simply retelling medieval stories (65). However, Townend 
emphasizes that Tolkien wasn’t exclusively a medievalist; his knowledge of the 
Latin and Greek classics was profound, and he was well read in post -medieval 
literature from Shakespeare to contemporary fiction. It is Old English, or Anglo-
Saxon, though that Townend says especially saturated Tolkien’s imagination, 
and he gives a detailed close reading of specific passages in The Hobbit and The 
Lord of the Rings  that echo passages in Beowulf. He also shows how Tolkien’s 
source material manifests not only in word-forms but also in word-meanings, as 
with the word reek, from the Old Eng lish rēc, or what Townend calls a 
“Tolkienian favorite”: rēc means “smoke,” rather than the modern meaning of 
“smell,” for which Tolkien prefers “stench,” from the Old English stenc (71). So, 
for instance, Frodo sees that “Mount Doom was burning, and a great reek rising” 
(71). This subtle influence from medieval sources also explains some of Tolkien’s 
distinctive diction. Townend argues that Tolkien had a preference for syntactic 
inversion or sentence -fronting, gained from his reading of William Morris 
especially, which is one of the most prominent features of his prose for many 
readers today: as examples, he cites the single paragraph when the Fellowship 
passes by the Argonath and the narrator declares that “Giants they seemed to 
Reviews 
274  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
[Frodo]” and “Great power and majesty they still wore” versus the more 
standard “They seemed giants to Frodo” and “They still wore great power and 
majesty” (74 –75). Because Tolkien’s prose is so lyrical, often even poetic, this 
kind of formal analysis of his diction is helpful, and not engaged in often 
enough.  
Townend titled chapter seven “Middle-earth,” and in it he analyzes the 
ways in which Tolkien succeeds in drawing connections between our earth and 
Arda. While, as previously mentioned, Townend praises Tolkien’s skills as a 
world-builder, he acknowledges he re that Tolkien’s world -building activities 
are not evenly distributed, but (naturally) reflect his own interests; so Middle -
earth is very detailed in terms of its socio -linguistics and history, but less well 
developed in regards to its agriculture or econ omics (as G.R.R. Martin has 
famously complained). W.H. Auden was “bothered by the lack of pets in The 
Lord of the Rings,” and there are indeed inevitable gaps in depicting a full world 
(85). However, Townend declares that where Tolkien most shines, apart from 
linguistics, is in botany. The world of Middle -earth is a world of biodiversity, 
and this is painstakingly rendered so as to feel as “real” as a fictional world can. 
Also realistic is Tolkien’s portrayal of different cultures and their 
interrelationships with each other; the legendarium is full of stories of migration 
and movement, so that “[f]ew of the peoples of Middle-earth are associated with 
an inalienable homeland,” meaning that Tolkien’s stories probe at questions of 
xenophobia and prejudice (89–90).  
The last chapter, “Elegy,” looks at the genre in which Tolkien classified 
Beowulf—not an epic but a “heroic-elegiac” work—and applies this same generic 
category to The Lord of the Rings . As all readers of Tolkien know, this is a story 
of poignantly sorrowful loss and change, and our relationship to the text mirrors 
the experience of the members of the Fellowship as they travel through a 
Middle-earth covered with the physical remnants of the past, from old standing 
stones and burial chambers to ruined watch towers to broken roads hidden 
under weeds; these scenes give us “half -hidden glimpses of a ‘vanished past,’” 
and contribute to the “ache of mortality” running all throughout Tolkien’s 
mythology (99). That Tolkien understood the grief of this ache so thorou ghly 
makes it all the more remarkable that his stories are also stories that champion 
the virtue of hope, or what Townend glosses as an implicitly Christianized hope 
(estel) that involves trusting in “the ultimate efficacy of divine providence” (102). 
Remarking on this sense of eucatastrophe is an appropriate way to conclude his 
introduction to Tolkien, as is his short discussion of Leaf by Niggle  and the 
sudden, eucatastrophic turn at the very end of this stunningly profound 
“Christian fairy tale”: “He gazed at the Tree, and slowly he lifted his arms and 
opened them wide. ‘It’s a gift!’ he said” (qtd. 106 –7). The Tree is not only a gift 
to Niggle, but to other travellers who come to value it as well, so that it turns 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  275 
out to be “very useful indeed […] as a holiday, and a refreshment” (qtd. 107). 
We can take Tolkien’s whole body of writings as the Tree, and agree with 
Townend that journeying to the worlds he created is indeed both a holiday and 
a refreshment.  
 
LAURA N. VAN DYKE  teaches in the Department of English and Creative Writing at 
Trinity Western University, in Langley, British Columbia. She is a co-editor of The Inklings 
and Culture (2020) and helps to direct the Inklings Institute of Canada. 
 
 
 
TOLKIEN ’S COSMOLOGY : DIVINE BEINGS AND MIDDLE -EARTH . Sam 
McBride. Kent, OH: Kent State UP. 2020. 272 p. 978-1606353967. $55.00.  
 
AM MCBRIDE WRITES THE FOLLOWING  in his Introduction to Tolkien’s 
Cosmology: Divine Beings and Middle-earth: “Exploring Tolkien’s legendarium 
will show the cosmological structure of Middle -earth, but also reveal moments 
in The Hobbit  and The Lord of the Rings  when the metaphysical impacts the 
physical” (x). The book delivers on its promise to show the reader places within 
the stories of The Hobbit  and The Lord of the Rings  likely to be influenced by 
spiritual beings who are described in The Silmarillion and the other volumes of 
the Legendarium. McBride’s book gi ves the reader a convincing description of 
the divine interventions of both visible and invisible powers from the earlier 
Ages of Middle-earth as they appear during the Third Age.  
The voice of the book is so approachable and genuine that it was easy 
to forget that I was, in fact, reading a book, and not having a conversation with 
the author. I never felt that I was being lectured at by a literature professor. At 
the same time, McBride’s argument is founded upon a thorough knowledge of 
J.R.R. Tolkien’s works and of Tolkien literary criticism up to the writing of the 
book published in 2020. The conversational feel and erudition of the work make 
this book a serviceable tool to both novice and seasoned readers of the works of 
J.R.R. Tolkien. One of the many things I like about the author is that he is aware 
that he might be guilty of confirmation bias in some or many of his examples. 
His humility is laudable as he both makes his argument and seeks to be certain 
he carries it only as far as it is justified (x). 
The author’s focus is to show the ways that The Silmarillion  is a 
foundation to what appears in the stories of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. 
He emphasizes The Silmarillion  because it provides the first description of 
Tolkien’s Legendarium after his death (xiv –xvii). McBride secondarily 
S 
Reviews 
276  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
references J.R.R. Tolkien’s other works to secure all of the points of his 
argument. I wrote above that Tolkien’s Cosmology can be a serviceable tool for 
different levels of readers. At one point the author observes of The Silmarillion, 
“Its mythological style makes it the most widely purchased unread book 
published under Tolkien’s name” (xv). Personally, I was in my thirties before I 
was able to finish reading and then became entranced by The Silmarillion. I share 
the experience the author describes of man y Tolkien fans who have reread The 
Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings multiple times but cannot get through Tolkien’s 
daunting work that looks like The Old Testament and doesn’t feel like his other 
books the reader has come to love. Like other fans, I tried many times to read 
The Silmarillion and eventually made the conscious decision to never try again. 
By chance, I listened to audiobooks, ones I knew I was never going to read in 
print, while I created stained glass. A few hours into listening to The Silmarillion 
read by Martin Shaw and I stopped working on stained glass and simply 
listened to Tolkien’s beautiful language and sequence of deep tales. At the end 
of the recording, I bought and read a print copy. That experience led to many 
re-readings of The Silmarillion and ultimately to my reading all of the volumes 
of The History of Middle-earth, some volumes as many as three times.  
Sam McBride’s Tolkien’s Cosmology  could give today’s readers an 
experience similar to my own with the Martin Shaw recording to become a 
gateway to The Silmarillion and possibly the rest of the Legendarium. I suggest 
that Tolkien’s Cosmology  could be such a gateway to The Silmarillion because 
McBride’s book is so approachable and pleasant to read that a novice can be 
introduced to Eru Ilúvatar, the Valar, the rebellion of Morgoth, the creation of 
Arda, and the downstream effects of Morgoth’s rebellion to the  history of all of 
the Ages of Middle-earth, and ultimately the stories in The Hobbit and The Lord 
of the Rings . His introduction to the spiritual beings and creation story is 
followed by chapters providing convincing instances of divine intervention that 
McBride sees in The Hobbit  and The Lord of the Rings . The book ends, 
appropriately, with a chapter on Eucatastrophe. 
For more seasoned readers Tolkien’s Cosmology does a fine job of 
summarizing much of the Legendarium, which can be useful in reminding us of 
the roles of the cast of characters within Tolkien’s works. There are times when 
McBride articulates and develops observations that a seasoned reader might 
have observed but not formally expressed during their own reading. It is likely 
that McBride will provide new observations for most experienced readers, 
which makes the book worthwhile.  
 Tolkien’s Cosmology: Divine Beings and Middle -earth is more a piece of 
literary criticism than a reference work such as The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s 
Companion by Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull. McBride’s book should 
not be expected to be as exhaustive or to be used in the same way as Hammond 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  277 
and Scull’s great reference work is used. Still, Tolkien’s Cosmology can be used as 
an approachable reference work on Tolkien’s Legendarium and on the 
connections between The Silmarillion and The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings . I 
believe its strength is in the author’s ability to point to the many appearances of 
divine intervention from The Silmarillion into The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. 
I agree with the author that his overall interpretation of The Hobbit and The Lord of 
the Rings does add depth to a reader’s experience of the three books discussed here.  
Another useful point of this text is its connection with world religions. 
While it will be natural for religious people to be interested in the book, being 
so isn’t necessary. Tolkien has many unbelieving or skeptical fans, who I think, 
will be just as int erested, as religious people are, in McBride’s description of 
Tolkien’s divine beings from The Silmarillion influencing The Hobbit and The Lord 
of the Rings.  
I especially recommend this book to readers who are attempting to get 
a toehold into an appreciation of The Silmarillion. I will end by repeating that I 
find Sam McBride’s Tolkien’s Cosmology: Divine Beings and Middle-earth to be such 
a pleasant experience that I recommend it for pleasure reading to all Tolkien 
fans. I know I will be rereading it in the future. 
 
PHILLIP FITZSIMMONS is the Steward for Society Archives for the Mythopoeic Society. His 
professional title is the University Archivist and Special Collections Librarian at 
Southwestern Oklahoma State University (SWOSU) in Weatherford, Oklahoma. At work 
he is responsible for the General Thomas P. Stafford Archives and is the administrator of 
the SWOSU Digital Commons. He manages Mythsoc's physical and digital collections 
through the SWOSU archive facilities. The Mythsoc digital repository is found at 
https://dc.swosu.edu/mythsoc/.  His research interests include the works of J.R.R. Tolkien, 
Owen Barfield, the Inklings, and Joseph Campbell , and digital services for academic 
libraries with an emphasis on archive management, institutional repository 
administration, and library reference services. 
 
 
 
DIARY OF AN OLD SOUL . George MacDonald. Annotated edition with 
introd. and notes by Timothy Larsen. Downers Grove: InterVarsity Press 
Academic, 2024. 296 p. 9781514007686. $30.00. 
 
IRST PUBLISHED IN 1880, A Book of Strife in the Form of the Diary of an Old Soul by 
George MacDonald is a collection of 366 poems, one for each day of the year 
including one for the twenty-ninth day of February that occurs in leap years. In 
this republished edition with the shorter title  Diary of an Old Soul , Timothy 
F 
Reviews 
278  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
Larsen provides an introduction with occasional annotations in the poems. 
Larsen writes about poems that are “designed to slow us down,” a characteristic 
shared with devotional literature (3), which he explores briefly in the context of 
the Victorians and MacDonald. Larsen also evaluates the meaning of 
MacDonald’s book title and how “strife” and “old soul” relate to the poems’ 
content (10–12), along with a key conclusion being that Diary of an Old Soul is “a 
collection of prayers” that “draw close to the he art of the deepest forms of 
spiritual devotion” (13). The poems express MacDonald’s faith in God, 
sometimes with allusions to passages from the Bible and often rich with imagery 
from nature, and how his faith intertwines with and illuminates his life 
experiences.  
There have been other republications of Diary of an Old Soul  since the 
1880s, and this republished edition claims to follow the original text closely. As 
an annotated edition, the actual annotations seem sparse, though this is fine to 
avoid having a plethora of footnotes and reference numbers that can be 
distracting, even when they are minimal, on the same page as the poems. The 
notations vary; there may be one to three footnotes for a poem, or no footnotes 
for several pages. The content is of scholarly or general interest and helpful as 
definitions of words less well known for the general reader or providing 
biographical information behind the poem or the time it was written.  
While this is an academic edition, the introduction’s  scholarly 
information is intermingled with personal commentary, and Larsen refers 
readers to “scholarly treatments” of MacDonald’s book in a footnote (2n1). It 
could have been interesting to share more background on MacDonald during 
the time of writing and publishing his poems, so to better complete the picture, 
I looked through MacDonald’s published letters. For instance, in a letter to his 
sister Georgina (Mrs. William Cowper -Temple), dated January 26,  1880, 
MacDonald writes her, “I send you at last a copy for yourself of my little book,” 
his privately published Diary of an Old Soul. He writes further: “Where shall we 
send the twenty copies you were so kind to order? Looking over it with more 
interest that I have yet felt for a book of my own, I think it is not a failure, but a 
great deal will depend, not only on the degree and kind of spiritual training but 
on the mood of the reader. That you will be with me in it I have every hope” 
(301). Notably here, MacDonald implies that the book’s success will also depend 
on how readers approach the poems and possibly to what depth of spiritual 
insight and understanding they have in appreciating what the poems 
communicate. This corresponds with what Larsen writes i n his introduction 
about the devotional nature of the poems.  
Following Larsen’s introduction, MacDonald’s poems are divided like 
chapters into the twelve months of the year from January to December, with 
each poem numbered for its respective day in the month. The book’s format 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  279 
easily serves as a regular companion throughout the year as a daily reading with 
a blank page next to each page of poems —like MacDonald’s first edition and 
intention—where readers can write or reflect on paper extending the 
“devotional conversation” (20). There is often a continuity between the ideas 
and themes (such as life, death, and love) running through the days that add to 
the interest in following how they may unfold or weave other thoughts and 
prayers together. For example, November’s poems begin th e first day with the 
concept that “Thou [Christ] know’st it all” and introduces the word “dark” 
briefly. In the poem for the second day of November, MacDonald expands on 
what Christ knows, including human experiences and the difficulty of being, 
and again mentions the dark. This motif becomes more prominent through the 
next three poems and connects with the night, culminating on the fifth day of 
November’s poem with the poet looking for Christ in the dark (243–44).  
MacDonald’s spiritual impetus might not resonate with all readers, but 
the depth and insights he writes about can speak to those willing to read and 
reflect on one or many of the poems. The beauty of this book is MacDonald’s 
poetic words and imagery portraying his deep belief and trust in God no matter 
how difficult or painful life can be, and readers may also find encouragement 
and hope in the pages. This particular published version is red cloth with gold 
embossing, under the dust jacket, and can be an at tractive gift or addition to a 
personal library. Its appearance both inside and out would probably please 
MacDonald himself who “loved books as physical objects” (19), and more 
importantly, anyone who values poems will likely find enjoyment or something 
meaningful to contemplate within them.  
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
MacDonald, George. An Expression of Character: The Letters of George MacDonald. Ed. Glenn 
Edward Sadler. Eerdmans, 1994.  
 
TIFFANY BROOKE MARTIN has a PhD in English and the Teaching of English from 
Idaho State University. Her dissertation was on Owen Barfield’s writings with a 
focus on fantasy and fiction, and she has been an adviser and editor for the Owen 
Barfield Literary Estate. Tiffany currently works as global editorial content manager 
for Roquette, an international company that produces ingredients for food, health, 
and nutrition markets. 
 
 
 

Reviews 
280  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
MIMETIC THEORY & MIDDLE -EARTH : UNTANGLING DESIRE IN 
TOLKIEN ’S LEGENDARIUM . Matthew J. Distefano. Chico, CA: Quoir, 2024. 
202 p. ISBN 9781957007922. $19.99. 
 
ATTHEW DISTEFANO’S FRIENDLY VOLUME  extends considerably the 
conversation about resonances between two twentieth -century literary 
giants begun by Hayden Head’s 2007 Mythlore article, “Imitative Desire in 
Tolkien’s Mythology: A Girardian Perspective.” René Girard (1923 –2015) rose 
to prominence as a literary scholar with the publication of his first book, 
Mensonge romantique et verité romanesque,  in 1961 (translated in 1965 as Deceit, 
Desire and the Novel ), around the time Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings came into 
vogue, but there is no eviden ce that they knew each other’s work. Yet, as 
Distefano ably shows, Tolkien’s work manifests the insights Girard found in the 
novels of Cervantes, Stendhal, Flaubert, Dostoevsky, and Proust, which led him 
to form the theory of desire, violence, and cultural origins he went on to pursue 
across other classic literature, from Greek tragedy to Shakespeare, and into fields 
such as anthropology and biblical studies. Most important for Distefano, 
however, is that both authors, each of whom he has written about sepa rately, 
distill valuable wisdom for living. Bringing them together not only clarifies 
essential aspects of Tolkien’s work by reading it through the lens of Girard’s 
mimetic theory but also highlights, extends, and one might even say enacts 
aspects of Girard’s theory that are easily overlooked. 
Distefano’s short, digestible chapters are organized into five sections 
that move from an overview of mimetic theory, with Tolkienian examples, to a 
more extended focus on elements that most reward mimetic analysis: the One 
Ring and, especially, Hobbits.  
The aptness of illustrations from Tolkien’s works make this an excellent 
introduction to Girard’s theory. Part of mimetic theory’s beauty is the simplicity 
and power of its two central ideas. First, human desire is fundamentally 
imitative and unconsciously  so—hence the term “mimetic.” Beyond our 
responses to what meets immediate physiological needs and appetites, we copy 
the desires of others, which leads us into rivalry for the objects of these shared 
desires. Girard primarily studied the violent consequen ces of mimetic desire, 
and sometimes even used the term to refer just to rivalrous desire, but, as 
Distefano rightly emphasizes, he also made clear that mimetic desire can have 
either good or bad results and is simply a fact of our nature. Indeed, Girard saw 
it as essentially good because it makes us free to choose our models rather than 
be driven just by appetite and instinct. The steady drumbeat of Distefano’s 
explication is how hobbits can serve as models of positive mimesis, desire that 
leads to friendship rather than strife. 
M 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  281 
Yet Distefano also pays strong attention to Girard’s second thesis: that 
human groups have had a persistent pattern, since prehistory, of temporarily 
resolving the escalating violence of mimetic rivalry that always threatens to 
engulf them by directing their violence at a single, essentially arbitrary victim—
what we have come to call in English, using a word from Tyndale’s translation 
of Leviticus, a scapegoat. Spontaneous scapegoating gives rise to the universal 
components of primitive religion: repetition of the scapegoat mechanism in the 
form of sacrificial ritual, prohibitions of the most virulent causes of rivalry, and 
myths that misremember the original victims of scapegoating as gods and 
sacralize violence. From this, according to Girard, develop the major institutions 
of human culture. Here Distefano reaches deepest into Tolkien’s legendarium 
for illustrations: Melkor’s mimetic envy as the source of proliferating violence, 
the ban of the Valar against sailing to the undying lands, the sacrifices initi ated 
by Sauron in Númenor. Readers of the Silmarillion will be able to add more. 
Again, however, where Girard’s analysis of culture focuses on the 
workings of sacred violence, Distefano emphasizes Tolkien’s alternatives. The 
culture of the Shire, for instance, balances a minimum of prohibitions with the 
freedom of imitating non -conflictual models of desire and celebrating non -
sacrificial rituals of friendship. While myth in Girard’s negative sense is present 
as the discord introduced by Melkor into the music of the Ainur (and variously 
darkening the minds of the peoples of Middle-earth), the stories told by Tolkien 
are what Distefano calls “subversive mythology.” Thus Beren is an “attempted 
scapegoat” of Thingol who becomes instead a model of heroic self-sacrifice, and 
Thingol a model of conversion from resentment to pity. The whole stor y of 
Smeagol/Gollum, Frodo, and Sam is a similarly subversive myth that Distefano 
deals with a much greater length. Gandalf’s story of how Gollum’s original 
community scapegoated him allows him to be seen with pity. Frodo’s self -
sacrifice becomes a reversal of scapegoating when he chooses his final exile from 
the Shire. 
Distefano points out one instance of Tolkien mythologizing in a 
negative sense: the depiction of Goblins in The Hobbit as the embodiment of evil, 
a myth that justifies their destruction at the Battle of the Five Armies, where they 
function as a scapegoat that makes temporary peace between Dwarves, Elves, 
and Men. Though Distefano does not consider the more complex depictio n of 
Orcs in The Lord of the Rings, he briefly raises the issue through a quotation from 
George R. R. Martin complaining that Tolkien fai ls to answer questions about 
Aragorn’s policy toward them as king. Distefano suggests that Tolkien gives us 
enough to imagine that Aragorn would show the kind of pity that Frodo shows 
Gollum. I would add that Tolkien strongly implies as much, and answers 
Martin’s concern, when he writes, in the chapter “The Steward and the King,” 
that “the slaves of Mordor he released and gave to them all the lands about Lake 
Reviews 
282  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
Núrnen to be their own.” While calling the Goblins “Manichean ‘bad guys’” (97, 
136) may fit the polarization of good and evil in The Hobbit, the depiction of Orcs, 
along with the other antagonists in the larger legendarium, ultimately conforms 
to Tolkien’s (and Girard’s) Augustinian vision of evil as a privation, and 
perversion, of good. 
The two chapters devoted to the One Ring well demonstrate how it 
rewards a mimetic analysis, with emphasis again on the culture and models of 
positive mimesis that help Hobbits resist the contagion of desire for power that 
it represents. Readers will be able to extend this analysis to the Silmarils and the 
Arkenstone as both objects and symbols of rivalrous desire (the latter discussed 
by Joshua Hren; see below) as well as Tolkien’s depiction of dragon-sickness in 
The Hobbit and his poem “The Hoard.” 
In the final chapters, Distefano’s interest in Tolkien’s models of positive 
mimesis takes center stage, primarily with reference to the Shire but also with 
mention of non -Hobbit members of the fellowship of the Ring —which could, 
again, be extended to Éomer , Éowyn, Faramir, and others. Brief discussion of 
“Boromir’s folly” could likewise point to the fuller representation of mimetic 
rivalry in his father, Denethor. But the mutual illumination of Girard and 
Tolkien on the positive potential of mimesis is the strength of this book, which 
comes through also in the “lessons from Middle -earth” at the end of each 
chapter, Distefano’s reflections on his own efforts to live these out, his friendly 
tone and informal style, and his hope that conscious desire really can save us all. 
To explain why Tolkien and Girard would be so deeply compatible, 
Distefano adverts to their shared Catholic faith and to the importance Girard 
places on Judeo-Christian revelation for showing how to interpret myth. Indeed, 
Girard finds the Bible supreme fo r its insight into mimetic desire and 
scapegoating, and thus for conceiving peaceful modes of communion. The 
greatness of many works of literature, for Girard, comes from how they 
anticipate or reflect these insights. The fact that Girard found his way to these 
insights by way of his reading of classic literature invites the question of whether 
something similar might be true for Tolkien, whose creative works were 
nurtured by his responses to the literature he studied and loved. Distefano’s case 
for adding Tolkien to the Girardian canon invites consideration of the two side-
by-side as interpreters of Western literary tradition. 
One key here, with further support for Distefano’s mimetic reading, is 
Tolkien’s major work of literary theory, “On Fairy -stories.” The functions of 
recovery, escape, and consolation that Tolkien identifies in fairy -stories, 
achieved above all by “eucatast rophe,” map well onto what Distefano calls 
“subversive mythology.” Likewise, the distinction Tolkien makes in this essay 
between magic motivated by possessive desire to dominate and enchantment 
that seeks shared enjoyment (evoked by Galadriel’s comments to Frodo and Sam 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  283 
before they look into her mirror) corresponds to, and is illuminated by, the 
distinction between negative and positive mimesis. Tolkien calls such 
enchantment an “elvish craft,” which implies that Elves might be seen alongside 
Hobbits as equally, though differently, positive models of desire. 
Distefano has made good music from the resonances between Tolkien 
and Girard. There are more songs to be sung, and I’m sure Distefano would 
welcome the singers around his fire with a cup of their favorite equivalent of 
Old Winyards. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Head, Hayden. “Imitative Desire in Tolkien’s Mythology: A Girardian Perspective.” 
Mythlore, vol. 26, no. 1/2, #99/100, 2007, pp. 137–48. 
Hren, Joshua. “Acquisitive Imitation and the Gift-Economy: Escaping Reciprocity in J.R.R. 
Tolkien’s The Hobbit.” Contagion: Journal of Violence, Mimesis, and Culture , vol. 24, 
2017, pp. 217–32. 
 
CURTIS GRUENLER is a professor of English at Hope College and editor of the Bulletin 
of the Colloquium on Violence & Religion, the international academic group for those 
interested in mimetic theory. He is the author of Piers Plowman and the Poetics of 
Enigma: Riddles, Rhetoric, and Theology (University of Notre Dame Press, 2017) and, 
most recently, “‘On Fairy-stories as a Theory of Literature: Tolkien Meets Ricœur and 
Girard on the Field of Myth” (Religion & Literature 55.2). 
 
 
 
POTTERVERSITY : ESSAYS EXPLORING THE WORLD OF HARRY 
POTTER . Edited by  Kathryn N. McDaniel and Emily Strand . Jefferson, NC: 
McFarland, 2024. 276 p. ISBN 978-1-4766-9053-7. $29.95.   
 
THE IVORY TOWER , HARRY POTTER , AND BEYOND : MORE ESSAYS ON 
THE WORKS OF J.K.  ROWLING . Edited by  Lana Whited. Columbia, MO: 
University of Missouri Press, 2023. 424 p. ISBN 9780826223005. $66.00.  
 
O MY MIND , THE MOST COMPELLING SCHOLARSHIP  makes precise, well -
researched arguments and raises serious questions about both the specific 
object of inquiry and the larger assumptions and goals of the field. With these 
criteria in mind, this review considers two excellent recent anthologies: Lana 
Whited’s The Ivory Tower, Harry Potter, and Beyond: More Essays on the Works of 
J.K. Rowling and Potterversity: Essays Exploring the World of Harry Potter, edited 
T 
Reviews 
284  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
by Kathryn McDaniel and Emily Strand. The various chapters of these books 
run the gamut of theoretical and applied approaches to J.K. Rowling’s texts, and 
are incisive, inclusive, intellectually stimulating, and innovative. Given their 
shared focus, I will be reviewing both together here.  
 That said, what precisely is their focus? Before even opening the texts, 
their titles raise an interesting question as to how this field self -identifies. 
Potterversity is much more focused on happenings internal to the world of Harry, 
Hermione, Ron, et al, whereas The Ivory Tower emphasizes the Beyond of its title 
as it explicitly considers Rowling’s other writings. To be clear, Rowling’s output 
extends far beyond her Harry Potter fame, now including “three companion 
books; a novel of social realism for ad ults, The Casual Vacancy; seven Cormoran 
Strike detective novels; the story basis for a London and Broadway play, The 
Cursed Child; a book-length fairy tale, The Ickabog; a holiday fable, The Christmas 
Pig, and three screenplays in the Fantastic Beasts film series,” as well as 
numerous other essays (Whited 3). With such a broad range of texts and styles 
by the same author, the overlap–and distinctions–between Potterversity and The 
Ivory Tower serve as a sort of microcosm of a very present question in this 
domain of scholarship: how precisely to divide up the field. As these works of 
Potter studies, Rowling studies, or something else? 
We often speak of Tolkien studies or mythopoeic studies, young adult 
literature or the fantasy genre; even as much as these differentiations are 
artificial, they still serve a purpose to scholars and the wider community. Titles, 
and the associations they i mplicitly raise, serve to divide the huge complexity 
and breadth of knowledge into digestible portions that can rapidly convey 
information. Harry Potter, though a massive cultural phenomenon, is a relatively 
recent entrant onto the scene of culturally sign ificant texts, and the field is in 
some ways still working to define itself, in terms of its aims and scope and also 
in relation to the larger literary canon (Ide 127). The titles of these two texts offer 
two different views on how to partition this realm of scholarship. McDaniel and 
Strand write in their introduction that their work is in the realm of Potter studies; 
Whited, while nodding towards the prominence of the core Harry Potter novels, 
emphasizes that there is much to be learned from Rowling’s othe r works 
(McDaniel and Strand 1, Whited 13).  
 The Ivory Tower, Harry Potter, and Beyond functions as a follow -up to 
Whited’s previous volume, The Ivory Tower and Harry Potter, published in 2002. 
Twenty-odd years later, much has changed for the scholars and fans as 
Rowling’s oeuvre has grown; these and the author’s other projects are now 
requisitely in dialogue with many of the socio-intellectual movements that have 
pushed the bo undaries of the humanities more broadly —intersectionality, 
critical race theory, post -colonial theory, etc. Potterversity, born out of the 
popular Potterversity podcast, similarly looks forward: born out of a medium 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  285 
that has seen a massive amount of growth in recent years, Potterversity brings 
scholarship to interested fans who may not be academics themselves (Rime et al 
1261; McDaniel and Strand, “Potterversity” ). As McDaniel and Strand write, 
“[We are] bringing to the conversation a wide range of voices and making sure 
that our ideas are accessible—to magical folk and Muggles alike” (McDaniel and 
Strand 1). The podcast features discussions by researchers, and this dialogic 
approach is continued in the anthology: each  thematic section includes 
transcribed discussions between the essay contributors and the editors that 
provide levity, accessibility, and further perspective to the complex issues faced 
in the text. And there certainly are complex issues at hand: Rowling’s  stated 
political positions, breaking into the mainstream of her fandom in 2020, have 
caused seismic ruptures in how scholars, fans, and some laypeople view and 
interact with the texts. Both anthologies do admirable jobs of including 
discussion of these notably complex and fraught issues. As McDaniel and Strand 
write: 
 
A recent challenge in the world of Potter Studies is how (and whether) to 
respond to Rowling’s controversial statements about trans people, which 
began in June 2020 and have continued. Like the Potter fandom in general, 
the scholars participating in our podcast and this book express a range of 
responses to the controversy . […] You will, however, find in the essays 
below that some scholars have adjusted their analytical perspectives to 
consider Rowling’s world in the light of her statements. (McDaniel and 
Strand 2) 
 
This intentionality is both brave and needed; in few other major realms of 
literary inquiry is the author of the text actively commenting on their creation, 
its meaning, or its relationship to society and their fan base. Tolkien is no longer 
alive to explore his legendarium, but Rowling has become an active presence in 
the discourses she has generated. 
 In The Gay Science, Nietzsche’s Madman famously declares that “God 
is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him.” But this is immediately 
followed with a question of meaning: “How shall we comfort ourselves, the 
murderers of all murderers?” (181). Reading over these an thologies, I kept 
returning to this the Madman and his questions, because they cut to the core of 
one of the key debates in literary studies —that of the importance of the author 
in interpretation. All of the various essays included in th e two texts are forced 
to navigate a question that has always been central to literary studies, even as it 
has been answered many different ways over time: how do the author, the text, 
the reader, and larger society interact? In recent Potter studies, this  issue has 
become far more acute than abstract academic debates as certain portions of the 
fandom have rebelled against J.K. Rowling and her political positions, 
Reviews 
286  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
particularly on trans rights. In the introduction to The Ivory Tower, Harry Potter, 
and Beyond , Whited recognizes that this has become a “death of the author” 
moment in Potter/Rowling studies, noting that Potter fans “have had to 
reconsider or end their own relationships with the texts” (Barthes 142; Whited 
10). Some authors within the anthologies still talk of Rowling’s intentions within 
their exegeses; however, others like Brent Slatterly, in his chapter of Potterversity, 
declare Rowling “anathema,” recasting her as “She-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named” 
(McDaniel and Strand 239–240). Rowling is dead, and we have killed her—or, at 
least, some of us. This tension —between engagement and erasure of the 
author—is not clearly resolved within the chapters of these books.  
I suspect that this juxtaposition speaks to a likely trend in upcoming 
scholarship: a distinction between Potter studies narrowly and Rowling studies 
more broadly. In this way, Potter fans who refuse to support Rowling’s further 
business ventures (for her works, certainly, have material value) may continue 
to engage with the world of Harry Potter that they have come to love, and those 
who are disinclined to dispose of her other projects can retain their ability to 
engage with them (Whited 372). That said, The Ivory Tower and Potterversity 
misses its opportunity to explicitly suggest this kind of reordering of the field. 
Both editorial teams refer to themselves as operating within Potter studies, and 
little work is done to establish Rowling studies as a related but distinct field. 
Perhaps this will change over time if Rowling’s other texts become more popular 
and scholars focus more on them, but for now each reader and critic must find 
their own way through this political and intellectual morass.  
 Implicit in this critique is an assumption that anthologies like these 
function to both indicate the state of the field and to delineate the expectations 
for other scholars working in their domain; they are both descriptive and 
normative. There seems to b e a tacit understanding across the editors and 
various authors of these manuscripts that Rowling’s political statements are 
problematic, and that arguments considering marginalization, tokenism, race 
relations and identity more broadly are academically and  socially acceptable 
and necessary. Both books deftly note that the political leanings of many 
academics and Harry Potter fans have come into conflict with Rowling and other 
more conservative perspectives, though this phenomenon is replicated in the 
broader children’s literature space and across many academic divisions 
(Duggan 148). Politics may be omnipresent in humanistic inquiry, but it can also 
be corrosive if ideological adherence becomes a requirement for academic 
acceptance. Political scientists often speak of big-tent parties; is the Harry Potter 
studies world a big-tent interpretive community? Does it want to be?  
I suspect that the editors and contributors of these volumes would 
respond to this question emphatically in the affirmative —that “the characters, 
stories, and situations of the magical world promote thinking that helps us 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  287 
navigate our more mundane but no less dangerous world” (McDaniel and 
Strand 1). For example, Alyssa Lowery’s chapter in The Ivory Tower  explicitly 
argues against overly racialized readings of Hermione’s S.P.E.W. and the house-
elves, and Emily Strand’s piece in Potterversity explicitly utilizes Christian 
theology in her exploration of Christmas scenes in Harry Potter . The books 
suggest that regardless of one’s political affiliation, one can find an interpretive 
community within the acafandom.  
Stepping away from this heavy discussion of politics, I wish to call out 
one particularly exciting inclusion in Potterversity: its use of “Conversation” 
chapters—transcribed dialogues between the editors and chapter authors of 
each thematic section. Not only did this give these various stakeholders 
additional opportunities to expound upon their views, they were able to engage 
in a level of critical discourse that is uncommon in these kinds of texts. For 
example, the “Playing Potter” conversation between Lau rie Beckoff, Tyson 
Pugh, and Kathryn McDaniel and Emily Strand ties together the games of 
medieval fiction, pedagogical approaches to teaching literature, and the games 
internal to the Harry Potter world in an exchange that is interdisciplinary and 
evocative (McDaniel and Strand 210 –212). Plus, the conversations are more 
informal, allowing for the text’s orientation as a work of acafandom to stand out 
as a piece of scholarship that is centered at the junction between the work and 
its cultural situation (McDaniel and Strand 1).  
And this injection of levity and joy is important in such a fraught 
cultural discourse. To many, especially the more casual readers, Rowling’s texts 
are simply an escape from the mundanity of life; they are a way to become more 
than a Muggle. A final quest ion I was left with after reading these anthologies 
was whether all of this interpretive activity detracts from the magic of Harry 
Potter. To paraphrase Tolkien, fantasy works because of its access to the 
numinous and the magical world beyond our own munda ne reality (Tolkien 
150). To my mind, these anthologies succeed precisely because they allow for 
interpretation while retaining the magic and joy of the texts. Each chapter and 
conversation is a celebration of the excitement and amazement of the secondary 
world hidden just beyond Platform 9 ¾ (in the case of Harry Potter). I had the 
opportunity to meet the editors—and many of the authors—of these volumes at 
the 2024 Harry Potter Academic Conference, and was delighted to find that all 
of these accomplished scholars kept the spirit of the magic of the stories central 
to their experience of scholarship and acafandom. I feel that these volumes 
succeed precisely because they allow for this synergy between creativity and 
analysis.  
 While there are many open questions of interpretation in the world of 
Potter/Rowling studies, these volumes go a long way toward answering a core 
question that vexes literature studies more broadly: what is the point of 
Reviews 
288  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
analyzing these texts? The answer, according to The Ivory Tower and 
Potterversity, is to find new ways to feel the magic of the wizarding world each 
time one reads the books, watches the movies, or thinks about the stories. We 
can debate the politics of Harry Potter or J.K. Rowling, but we cannot and must 
not forget the joy of going to a world of wonder and of looking inside of 
ourselves to discover our own magic. If I abide by the criteria I set out at the 
beginning of this review —precision in scholarship and attention to larger 
assumptions and goals —then these two books certainly succeed, especially 
when taken together.  
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Barthes, Roland. Image, Music, Text, translated by Stephen Heath, Fontana, 1977. 
Duggan, Jennifer. “ Transformative Readings: Harry Potter Fan Fiction, Trans/Queer 
Reader Response, and J. K. Rowling.” Children’s Literature in Education, vol. 53, 2022, 
pp. 147–68. 
Ide, Todd. “Review: The Order of Harry Potter: Literary Skill in the Hogwarts Epic.” Children’s 
Literature Association Quarterly, vol. 37, no. 1, 2012, pp. 127–30.  
McDaniel, Kathryn N., and Emily Strand. “Potterversity.” Mugglenet, 2025, 
https://www.mugglenet.com/podcasts/potterversity/.  
Nietzsche, Friedrich. The Gay Science, translated by Walter Kaufmann, Vintage, 1974. 
Rime, Jemily, Chris Pike, and Tom Collins. “What is a podcast? Considering innovations 
in podcasting through the six-tensions framework.” Convergence, vol. 28, no. 5, 2022, 
pp. 1260–1282. 
Tolkien, J.R.R. “On Fairy-stories.” The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays , edited by 
Cristopher Tolkien, George Allen and Unwin, 1983, pp. 109-161. 
 
LIAM BUTCHART, MD, MA, is currently a resident physician in psychiatry at the Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai –Morningside/West program (New York, NY). He 
graduated from the Stony Brook University Renaissance School of Medicine and received 
his MA in Medical Human ities, Compassionate Care, and Bioethics from Stony Brook 
University, where he currently teaches on narrative medicine and virtue ethics. His 
research interests include psychoanalysis and literature, medical humanities, bioethics, 
and the intersection of the mental health illness experience with the arts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  289 
HARRY POTTER AND RESISTANCE . Beth Sutton -Ramspeck. Routledge, 
2023. 224 pp. $40.00 pbk. 978-1032319872;  also available in hbk. and eBook. 
 
ARRY POTTER AND RESISTANCE IS A CHALLENGING BOOK TO READ, or at least this 
reader found it to be so. This is a partly a product of the extremely small font 
size that the book is printed in, but it is also a reflection of how densely 
populated with citations to other works the book is. Sutton -Ramspeck’s 
scholarly approach to analyzing a book series that often is dismissed as “just 
children’s books” is mostly welcome, though I sometimes found myself thinking 
“tell me what you think, not what everyone else thinks!” Still, all in all, Sutton -
Ramspeck offers a compelling analysis of the Harry Potter series, emphasizing 
the centrality of rule-breaking and resistance in the narrative.  
Sutton-Ramspeck argues that Harry’s defiance transcends mere 
adolescent rebellion, serving as a fundamental element in combating systemic 
evils within the wizarding world. She explores how Harry and his allies 
challenge the Ministry of Magic’s corruption a nd the entrenched racist 
ideologies that gave rise to Voldemort. The book draws parallels between the 
actions of Dumbledore’s Army and the Order of the Phoenix with historical 
resistance movements, such as those during World War II and the U.S. Civil 
Rights era. And while the book was published in 2023, some might view the 
consideration of resistance to the second return to power of Voldemort to be 
particularly timely in 2025. 
Sutton-Ramspeck’s interdisciplinary approach mostly enriches the 
analysis, as she incorporates insights from political science, psychology, 
philosophy, history, race studies, and women’s studies. This allows for a 
nuanced examination of themes like systemi c oppression, the role of creativity 
in resistance, and the ethical complexities of rule-breaking. The book delves into 
the portrayal of house -elves, particularly Dobby, through a feminist lens, 
challenging interpretations that view the series as condoning  slavery. 
Additionally, it investigates the language associated with dirt and purity, 
uncovering deep-seated prejudices in both magical and Muggle societies.  
While the extensive use of critical theory may be dense for casual 
readers, it provides a thorough exploration for those interested in a deeper 
understanding of the series’ social and political dimensions. By embracing the 
unresolved issues within the narr ative, she underscores the series’ capacity to 
inspire readers to contemplate and challenge societal injustices.  
However, any current discussion of the Harry Potter franchise must 
grapple with the controversy surrounding J.K. Rowling’s public comments on 
transgender rights. Sutton -Ramspeck does not shy away from this issue, 
providing a fairly thoughtful consideration  of how Rowling’s transphobic 
remarks have impacted the series’ legacy. She acknowledges the harm caused 
H 
Reviews 
290  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
by Rowling’s rhetoric, particularly its contradiction with the series’ themes of 
inclusivity, empathy, and resistance to bigotry. Sutton -Ramspeck seeks to 
detach these tensions from the broader context of her analysis, emphasizing that 
the text and its creator should be critically separated. Nonetheless, she notes that 
while the series contains messages of acceptance and social justice, readers must 
also reckon with the ways in which Rowling’s views complicate its reception 
and the cultural space it occupies. 
Sutton-Ramspeck encourages readers to approach the series critically, 
embracing its potential to inspire resistance while remaining mindful of the real-
world implications of Rowling’s statements. In doing so, Harry Potter and Resistance 
contributes to an ongoing conversation about how fans and scholars can engage 
with works of art whose creators have been accused of perpetuating harm.1 
The book opens by framing rule -breaking not as mere adolescent 
rebellion but as a deliberate act of resistance. Sutton-Ramspeck explores Harry, 
Hermione, and Ron’s defiance of both school rules and societal norms, arguing 
that these acts undermine corrupt systems, such as the Ministry of Magic’s 
authoritarian policies. The chapter draws parallels to historical resistance 
movements, emphasizing how even small acts of disobedience can catalyze 
significant change. 
The second chapter examines Dumbledore’s Army (DA) as a case 
study in grassroots activism. Sutton-Ramspeck details how the DA mirrors real-
world resistance groups, such as World War II resistance fighters and civil rights 
organizations. She discusses the i mportance of leadership, solidarity, and 
shared purpose in mobilizing against oppressive regimes, highlighting the DA’s 
defiance of Dolores Umbridge and the Ministry’s overreach. 
Next, Sutton -Ramspeck delves into the wizarding world’s deeply 
entrenched notions of blood purity and its parallels to real -world racism. She 
analyzes characters like Hermione, Hagrid, and Lupin, who resist systemic 
prejudices through their actions and adv ocacy. This chapter critiques the 
limitations of the series in fully addressing these issues, encouraging readers to 
engage critically with the text. 
The fourth chapter focuses on female resistance, from Hermione’s 
intellectual defiance to Ginny’s active participation in battles against 
Voldemort’s forces. Sutton-Ramspeck examines the gender dynamics within the 
series, addressing both empowering moments and the occasional reinforcement 
of traditional gender roles. The chapter also critiques Rowling’s inconsistencies, 
particularly regarding intersectionality in her portrayal of resistance. 
 
1 This conversation is all the more timely given the recent revelations of allegations of truly 
despicable conduct by otherwise beloved fantasy author Neil Gaiman. 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  291 
Sutton-Ramspeck then highlights how creativity becomes a tool for 
defiance, analyzing Fred and George Weasley’s pranks, Luna Lovegood’s 
eccentricity, and the satirical resistance of The Quibbler. These moments of levity 
and subversion are framed as vital counterpoints to the oppressive atmosphere 
of Voldemort’s reign, showing how humor and individuality can undermine 
fear and conformity. 
Chapter 6 is the final chapter directly addressing the text of the books. 
This chapter explores the ethical complexities of resistance. Sutton -Ramspeck 
addresses moments when Harry and his allies cross moral lines, such as using 
Unforgivable Curses or enda ngering others. She argues that these ambiguities 
mirror real -world ethical dilemmas faced by resistance movements, adding 
depth to the series’ portrayal of rebellion. 
In the seventh chapter, Sutton -Ramspeck again addresses Rowling’s 
transphobic remarks and their impact on the Harry Potter fandom, which she 
had already touched upon in the preface to the book. As noted above, she 
critiques how these statements conflict with the series’ themes of inclusion and 
justice, but advocates for separating the text from its author, proposing that fans 
and scholars can reinterpret the series in ways that resist the harm caused by 
Rowling’s views. 
The final chapter reflects on the Harry Potter fandom’s activism, from 
charitable initiatives inspired by the series to grassroots movements challenging 
Rowling’s statements. Sutton -Ramspeck celebrates the ways in which readers 
have turned the series’ mess ages of resistance into real -world action, 
demonstrating how literature can inspire meaningful change. 
While Sutton -Ramspeck critiques Rowling’s views and some of the 
series’ limitations, the book often leans heavily into celebrating the text as a 
beacon of resistance. This optimism risks overshadowing the deeper systemic 
issues within the narrative, such a s its lack of diverse representation and the 
implicit reinforcement of certain hierarchies (e.g., the marginalization of house-
elves and other magical creatures). Although the book addresses themes of race, 
gender, and class, the analysis occasionally feels compartmentalized rather than 
fully intersectional. For instance, the exploration of gender resistance could have 
been deepened by examining how these dynamics intersect with race and class 
in the wizarding world, particularly given the series’ Eurocentr ic framing. 
Although the final chapter discusses the Harry Potter fandom’s activism, it 
could have delved further into the complex dynamics within the fan 
community, particularly with regard to the schism between those who continue 
to support Rowling and those who reject her entirely. 
While Sutton-Ramspeck engages somewhat with some critiques of the 
series, she fails to sufficiently engage with other criticisms of the Potter books, 
such as claims that that the series upholds traditional power structures (e.g., the 
Reviews 
292  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
privileged position of pureblood families like the Malfoys and the focus on the 
elite world of Hogwarts). She touches on these assessments but does not fully 
explore how these structural elements might undermine the series’ broader 
themes of resistance. In addition, while the chapter-by-chapter structure is clear 
and well -organized, certain themes —such as rule -breaking and grassroots 
movements—are revisited multiple times, leading to some redundancy. A more 
concise integration of overlapping ideas could have streamlined the analysis. 
All in all, despite its challenges, Sutton -Ramspeck’s Harry Potter and 
Resistance is a valuable addition to the body of scholarship on the Harry Potter 
series. Its strengths lie in its interdisciplinary lens, candid engagement with 
Rowling’s controversies, and thoughtful exploration of resistance as a 
multifaceted theme. However, the b ook’s optimism sometimes overshadows 
deeper critiques of the series’ structural issues. Nonetheless, for fans and 
scholars alike, this book is a thought-provoking resource that invites readers to 
reflect on the complexities of resistance in both fiction and reality. It is most 
impactful when viewed as a starting point for deeper conversations about 
activism, morality, and the role of literature in shaping societal values. 
 
DOUGLAS C. KANE is an attorney specializing in employment discrimination and 
harassment cases and other civil rights matters.  He is also a Middle-earth enthusiast who 
has loved the works of J.R.R. Tolkien for more than forty years.  He co-founded and runs 
the Tolkien Int ernet discussion site thehalloffire.net.  His first book, Arda Reconstructed: 
The Creation of the Published Silmarillion, was published by Lehigh University Press in 2009, 
with a paperback edition released in 2011. He has also had numerous papers and reviews 
published in Tolkien Studies, Mythlore, and The Journal of Tolkien Research .  Doug lives in 
Santa Cruz, California with his partner, Beth Dyer, and their cat, Legolas Lateef. 
 
 
 
MAPPING A SENSE OF HUMOR : NARRATIVE AND SPACE IN TERRY 
PRATCHETT ’S DISCWORLD NOVELS . Daniel Lüthi. Altadena, CA: 
Mythopoeic Press. 2023. 291 p. ISBN 9781887726238. $19.95.  
 
HEN TERRY PRATCHETT WROTE HIS FIRST DISCWORLD NOVELS in the early 
1980s, they were primarily parodies of fantasy novels in general and of 
the Lord of the Rings  trilogy specifically. The further development of the 
Discworld series beyond this into its own secondary world over a span of 32 
years is explored by Daniel L üthi. This work begins with an exploration of 
fantasy works and their place in literature, starting with an attempt to define 
what the term “fantasy” means. He then delves into the similarities fantasy has 
W 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  293 
with postmodern fiction and how both these genres reflect the real world. While 
investigating this topic, Lüthi compares Pratchett’s works with other well -
known fantasy novels, not just Tolkien’s. In comparison with The Hobbit and the 
Lord of the Rings  trilogy, the first Discworld novels are quest fantasies but the 
quest is for our nominal hero to show a tourist the sights of Discworld. The 
“hero” in the first two novels is a failed wizard and primarily a coward. As 
Pratchett continued to write about this world, he used those characters that are 
normally in the background of fantasy novels and made them the focus of the 
novels. So our heroes in other Discworld novels are a witch, a city guard, or a 
con man, all of whom fight against what role the typical fantasy narrative would 
have them do but also fight against becoming the focus of the story. “Pratchett 
imbues his protagonists with an awareness of the power of stories that challenge 
the manner in which their counterparts in other fantasy books accept their roles” 
(81–82). His characters fight the narrative imperative that would have them 
behave in expected ways for others in their roles in other stories.  
All of this leads to a discussion of the mapping of Discworld in the 
seventh chapter. Pratchett did not map out Discworld for his first two novels 
and, according to Lüthi, this was a deliberate decision. He did, eventually, work 
with Stephen Briggs to create a map of Discworld. In some ways, this is 
understandable. Once a map is constructed, the boundaries of the map constrain 
the stories that can be told. However, par ticularly for the novels set in the city -
state of Ankh -Morpork, having a consistent struct ure to refer to became 
increasingly important to prevent confusion to the author and the reader. Still, 
Lüthi explains that readers asked Pratchett if the mapping of Ankh -Morpork 
would stifle the stories. This, needless to say, did not happen. 
The last section of the book covers the further development of the 
Discworld and Ankh-Morpork. Lüthi points out that Pratchett’s works are not 
just parodies of fantasy novels but are satires of our real world as well. In the 
later novels, Ankh -Morpork begins to industrialize which, of course, brings 
changes to the entirety of Discworld. While magic s till has a central role in the 
novels, the Discworld equivalents of steam engines, movies, and 
telecommunications enter into the world. Since most fantasy novels are content 
to stay in a quasi-medieval state, this is a marked difference between Pratchett’s 
works and the genre he began parodying. This section also discusses the 
multimedia resources developed from the novels. There are video games, 
movies, and the possibility exists of further movies and television series. 
This book is a revision of the author’s dissertation, which at times 
comes through, especially with the copious footnotes. It is, however, an 
informative treatise on the works of Terry Pratchett. This reviewer would have 
liked more about the mapping of Dis cworld and found the title of the book 
Reviews 
294  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
somewhat misleading. Still for fans of the Discworld novels, this will be an 
interesting read. 
 
SUSAN M. MOORE is a catalog librarian and collection strategist at the University of 
Northern Iowa. Prior to working at the University of Northern Iowa, she was a catalog 
librarian at the University of Arizona. She received her MLS from the University of Iowa 
in 1984 an d holds a M.A. in Geography from the University of Arizona and a B.A. in 
Political Science from the University of Northern Iowa.  
 
 
 
ART AND ENCHANTMENT : HOW WONDER WORKS . Patrick Curry. 
London and New York: Routledge, 2023. 244 p. ISBN 978-1-032-40467-7. $48.99.  
 
OLKIEN WROTE AN ESSAY TO ACCOMPANY  Smith of Wootton Major and at the 
very end he stated that “‘Faery’ is as necessary for the health and complete 
functioning of the Human as is sunlight for physical life […]” ( Smith 144–5). 
Faerie was to Tolkien both an embodiment and a source of enchantment ( OFS 
32) and from this remarkable statement it is clear that he regarded enchantment 
as essential for human flourishing. We have Tolkien’s thoughts on enchantment 
in “On Fairy-stories,” in the essay that accompanies Smith of Wootton Major, and 
in a few of his letters (#131 in particular), but there is much more that could be 
said about both enchantment and disenchantment, which is its lack or opposite.  
Patrick Curry has written extensively on Tolkien, art and enchantment, 
and Art and Enchantment is his most academic in nature on these subjects, and 
the most fully developed and detailed. He lays out an ambitious plan for the 
book at the very beginning: 
 
This book celebrates and defends the experience of wonder in art, and of 
art as enchanting. It explores the characteristics, conditions, and 
dynamics of artistic creativity and appreciation. But it also concerns the 
absence of enchantment, and the reasons for that. I don’t altogether rule 
out the possibility of any art enchanting, but I do suggest that some kinds 
are more like to than others, and we shall see why. (2) 
 
The book itself begins with an Introduction, and a lengthy chapter called “What 
is Enchantment?” Chapters follow on specific kinds of art with two chapters 
each on Painting, Music and Fiction, a short chapter on Poetry, a Conclusion, 
and an ample Index. The book is heavily notated and referenced, and if nothing 
else the reader will find many suggestions for further reading on enchantment, 
T 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  295 
art and the intersection of the two. In addition, a worthy chapter on jazz that 
was cut for space has been posted on the author’s website at patrickcurry.co.uk.  
Enchantment is difficult to define simply, as it is a rich, complex 
phenomenon. It includes wonder, but it is a particular kind of encounter with 
wonder.  With enchantment Curry is speaking of a specific phenomenon, or 
class of phenomena: 
 
The heart of enchantment is an experience of wonder. It varies in intensity 
from charm, through delight, to full -blown joy. The last distinguishes 
radical or deep enchantment, rare but life changing. (8) 
 
We most often encounter enchantment in the context of falling in love or an 
encounter with nature, but there are other ways it can be found, such as religion, 
food and drink, learning, humor, art, even sports (29). 
Curry emphasizes that enchantment is not something that can be 
planned on, or willed or forced to occur. It cannot be bidden, created, 
commanded or managed. It cannot be found where either domination and 
control over others are an objective. Curry explains that:  
 
Enchantment is fundamentally relational. It is wonder at, or enchantment 
by, another. It’s not power over them, nor being the object of power. […] 
It also follows that because no one is in charge, enchantment is wild, 
unbiddable. That inconvenient truth means that although it can be 
invited, it cannot be created, commanded, or managed. (8) 
 
Enchantment cannot even be counted upon to reoccur under identical 
conditions, as it is deeply connected to a unique time, place and situation. Curry 
presents an example: 
 
It was that movement of the fourth Brandenburg Concerto, just as the 
English Consort, as it then was, played it, in that evening’s slanting light, 
there in Holland Park, interspersed with that blackbird’s song, which 
transported us. (19) 
 
Curry distinguishes enchantment from a mystical or dionysiac ecstasy 
or union, as enchantment is an encounter over a “gap of difference” (9). When 
enchanted we experience the “other” in a heightened way. A gap or boundary 
will still be present, but ceases to matter temporarily. We are still ourselves, but 
the “other” becomes a source of pure joy, sometimes overwhelming, for a 
usually too brief time. The “other” here can be almost anything: an animal, plant 
or place, or even an experience of the senses. Most  of us have some experience 
Reviews 
296  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
of enchantment, perhaps an artwork that moved us, the first time we tasted a 
favorite food or the first time we met a loved one.  
Curry develops his understanding of enchantment from at least two 
starting points. One of them is Weber’s well-known argument that the world is 
becoming increasingly disenchanted as it (supposedly) moves towards a view 
that “we can in principle control everything by means of calculation ” (Weber 12 –
13). Religion, myth, magic are no longer necessary as “we need no longer have 
recourse to magic in order to control the spirits or pray to them. Instead, 
technology and calculation achieve our ends” (13). Curry ap pears to accept 
Weber’s understanding of some of the causes of disenchantment: 
“rationalisation and intellectuali sation” (Curry 198) and the drive towards 
“rational cognition and mastery of nature” (15). These are hostile to 
enchantment, as they are focused on control and possession, whereas 
enchantment is almost always a surprise, and requires an openness, what the 
travel writer Freya Stark calls “fearless receptivity” ( qtd. in Curry 30). Curry 
points out that possessiveness is antithetical to enchantment,  saying that “false 
enchantment” is “a desire either to possess the other or be possessed by them” 
(9, quoting W.H. Auden). Enchantment presumes a desire for the other to 
flourish (9). As Tolkien says about Faerie (a source of enchantment), it 
“represents love: that is, a love and respect for all things, ‘inanimate’ and 
‘animate’, an unpossessive love of them as ‘other’“ (Smith 144). 
Whereas Weber is focused on identifying disenchantment, the loss of 
enchantment, Tolkien is positively interested in identifying and re -awakening 
it. In Tolkien’s usage of the term enchantment is an “elvish craft” or “living, 
realised sub -creative art” tha t “does not seek delusion, nor bewitchment and 
domination; it seeks shared enrichment, partners in making and delight, not 
slaves” (OFS 64). Enchantment is concerned with evoking wonder and creating 
beauty. In a letter to Milton Waldman, Tolkien describes the elvish craft of 
enchantment as a particular kind of ‘magic’:  
 
Their [elves] ‘magic’ is Art, delivered from many of its human limitations: 
more effortless, more quick, more complete (product, and vision in 
unflawed correspondence). And its object is Art not Power, sub-creation 
not domination and tyrannous re-forming of Creation. (Letters 205, #131)   
 
In Tolkien’s understanding (which is largely Curry’s as well) enchantment seeks 
partners, not possessors or possessions. It seeks to create and delight, rather than 
dominate. 
While enchantment cannot be made or forced to occur, conditions can 
be created which make it more likely to occur, and much of the focus of Art and 
Enchantment is on art, artists and artistic movements and Curry’s thoughts on 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  297 
whether they might be more, or less, conducive to enchantment. Curry’s point-
of-view is definitely an opinion. Readers will not find much in the way of 
scientific studies or data in the book. But it is a point -of-view that has been 
carefully and extensively developed, and at the end it may be seen to have a 
great internal consistency, and perhaps usefulness for understanding an 
important phenomenon. This consistency and analysis begins from a particular 
understanding of enchantment and prevents the book fro m merely being an 
enumeration of what Curry does and doesn’t like in art.  
Curry also claims the book is not meant to be a discussion of what is 
and isn’t art (2). Not all artists are trying to enchant and Curry gives examples 
of works such as Guernica by Pablo Picasso and The Handmaid’s Tale by Margaret 
Atwood that are moving and powerful, but few would call enchanting (2). Curry 
is also willing to acknowledge that there are subjects like opera and hip-hop that 
are a “closed book” (3) to him, where he feels unqualified to speak for various 
reasons.  
A few examples of art that Curry believes is likely to elicit enchantment 
are in order. As an example of a painter Curry proposes Claude Monet (49). This 
is not a particularly controversial position as Monet (and many of the other 
Impressionists) have been  and continue to be well -regarded for the beauty of 
their works. Curry suggests that popularity may actually be a hindrance to 
enchantment because of over -familiarity, but encourages getting to know 
Monet’s works better anyways (49–50). In particular he recommends the lesser-
known Nymphéas (Water Lilies) cycle of paintings from later in Monet’s life, 
which he compares to Beethoven’s final string quartets as high points in Western 
art (50). 
In contrast, Damien Hirst (perhaps better known in the UK than North 
America) is an example of an artist that Curry thinks is disenchanting, part of 
an art world that is actively hostile to enchantment (103–104).  Hirst is infamous 
for artworks consisting of animal carcasses in formaldehyde. Another work 
features 9000 dead butterflies. It is easy to see how far this is from enchanting; 
its purpose instead is to shock or horrify. Curry’s scorn for Hirst is obv ious, 
describing him as “a foul -mouthed brutalist  whose grotesque self -pity has 
survived extravagant wealth (c. $384 million) —the reward of an art world run 
by business” (104). 
Curry sees Damien Hirst as an example of the modernism that is a 
particular enemy to enchantment in his view (104). Curry draws a distinction 
between the modern sensibility that we are all affected by, and the modernism 
that developed later as an ideology (31). He notes that in the 19th century some 
people in the West and Japan began to see themselves as modern, which led to, 
among other things, a relaxed attitude towards tradition. This sensibility led 
them to ignore tradition at times and experiment and i nnovate. However, 
Reviews 
298  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
towards the end of the 19th century modernism as an ideology got its start. It 
was a sometimes virulent reaction to tradition, which was associated by 
modernists with superstition, oppression and ignorance, and which therefore 
needed to be destroyed (31). Modernism was intended to be progressive, but it 
“needs icons to smash and enemies, both past and present, to smite” (31) and 
has seemed to delight in only systematic destruction and deconstruction. With 
the overturn of tradition, scientific naturalism and  materialism (31) take its 
place, and Weber has pointed out that these are about control and possession, 
and therefore hostile to enchantment. Curry argues that the movement is still 
ongoing, and continues to be programmatically opposed to enchantment: 
 
Now there’s no doubt that modernism was originally experienced by 
some as tremendously liberating and exciting, nor that it has resulted in 
some good and occasionally great art, along with a lot of rubbish. But 
wonder, delight, and joy in art are things that modernists largely reject. (32)  
 
Concerning music, it has been said (perhaps by Debussy) that “space 
is the music between the notes,” and Curry notes that enchantment takes place 
across gaps and spaces (9). He writes that “Enchantment lives even in the cracks, 
in the sense of imperfections, within the notes—one reason why I think acoustic 
instruments, improvised music, and live performances have the greatest 
potential for enchantment” (123). Among composers he recommends Debussy 
and Ravel as particularly conducive to enchantment, as well as some lesser -
known 19th and 20th century composers such as Satie, Fauré, Messiaen, and 
Takemitsu. 
Curry is not afraid to include “children’s literature” in his discussion 
of enchantment in literature. He mentions The Wind in the Willows  (Kenneth 
Grahame), which many would agree with. The chapter “Piper at the Gates of 
Dawn” contains some of the most enchanting moments in literature. It may 
surprise everyone except those who have read them, but he commends the 
“Mary Poppins” novels by P.L. Travers for their portrayal of the titular character 
as “at once a force of nature and a spiritual being of indeterm inate sort […] she 
is completely unbiddable, a barely-self-controlled cyclone of wild enchantment” 
(183). Curry is less fond of His Dark Materials for its didacticism and Winnie-the-
Pooh for its preciousness, though he recognizes that some will see wonder in 
these (180, 179). 
Readers of this journal who are interested in enchantment or Tolkien’s 
understanding of enchantment may find much to think about in Art and 
Enchantment. Curry’s knowledge of art is vast and the discussion is fast and 
wide-ranging. A familiarity, or willingness to get familiar, with the artists and 
movements he discusses will be helpful towards gaining from the book. Curry 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  299 
keeps primarily to the 19th through 21st centuries, but there is still a lot to take 
in.  
With all the discussion on art and artists in the book it is easy to lose 
sight of perhaps the most important argument that Curry makes, that 
enchantment is worth pursuing. He says that “it is not a luxury but something 
which can make life worth living, an d even be life -changing” (31). Tolkien 
would likely agree, saying that enchantment is “essential to […] full and proper 
human development ” ( Smith 131). Glamour, what Curry calls “false 
enchantment, the desire for possession” (30), and disenchantment are prevalent. 
It takes an effort to maintain an openness towards enchantment, but Curry and 
Tolkien would likely say the results are worth it. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Tolkien, J.R.R. Tolkien On Fairy-stories. Edited by Verlyn Flieger and Douglas A. Anderson, 
HarperCollinsPublishers, 2008. 
—. The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Humphrey Carpenter & Christopher Tolkien, 2nd 
edition, Houghton Mifflin, 2023. 
—. Smith of Wootton Major Extended Edition , e dited by Verlyn Flieger, HarperCollins 
Publishers, 2015. 
Weber, Max. “Science as a Vocation .” The Vocation Lectures , edited by David Owen and 
Tracy B. Strong, translated by Rodney Livingstone, Hackett Publishing Company, 
2004. 
 
N. TREVOR BRIERLY has a background in the humanities with an MLIS from the 
University of Texas at Austin, a MA from Signum University and a BA in English 
from George Mason University. His research interests include worldbuilding in 
speculative fiction, Tolkien, Frank Herbert, Le Guin, Shakespeare, and the 
Renaissance. He has published an essay “Worldbuilding Design Patterns in the 
Works of J.R.R. Tolkien” in “Sub-creating Arda” (Walking Tree Publishers, 2019) and 
is co -editor of “Discovering Dune” from McFarland Books (2022). He lives in 
Northern Virginia and is sometimes enchanted by jazz, tea and cats. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reviews 
300  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
BRIEFLY NOTED  
 
HARRY POTTER AND THE MYTH OF MILLENNIALS: IDENTITY, RECEPTION, 
AND POLITICS. Priscilla Hobbs. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2022. 204 pp. 
Hardcover: 978-1-7936-2027-9. $95.00; ebook: 978-1-7936-2028-6, $45.00. 
 
RISCILLA HOBBS’S HARRY POTTER AND THE MYTH OF MILLENNIALS adds to an 
important and growing literature about the intersection between popular 
culture and politics. As she notes, the Harry Potter series was formative for a 
generation of young readers and almost certainly influenced their views of 
social justice, government power, and war. Hobbs combines an academic 
analysis of the series’ political themes with her personal reflections about the 
franchise and American political trends during the early 2000s. The book is 
probably best suited to readers seeking a short overview of why J.K. Rowling’s 
stories resonated with the millennial generation, and what lessons they might 
have drawn from it.  
The first half of the book examines how the Harry Potter series became 
a cultural phenomenon. Hobbs initially frames Harry Potter’s success as another 
example of the power of the hero’s journey archetype. Rowling’s story, however, 
departs from the hero’s journey by emphasizing how Harry, Ron, Hermione, 
and the other protagonists created a “found family” that often challenged the 
social norms of their community. Hobbs argues that the series in effect gave 
young readers permission “to embrace their unique sel ves […] even if it 
deviated from illusory social norms” (64), helping to explain millennials’ 
passion for expressing and defending one’s identity.  
The second half explores lessons that fans have drawn from the Harry 
Potter series on a variety of issues, including worker’s rights, media, and 
education, and how the fandom mobilized to support activism. Drawing heavily 
on Gierzynski and Eddy’s survey of Harry Potter readers, Hobbs argues that 
millennials who read Harry Potter were more likely to accept religious and 
gender diversity, oppose authoritarian leaders, and condemn torture. The last 
chapter touches on fan criticism of Rowling’s comments about t rans rights. 
However, Hobbs’s limited coverage of the backlash, which started years before 
the book’s publication, prematurely dates  Harry Potter and the Myth of 
Millennials, and indeed raises underexplored questions of how much Harry 
Potter will shape millennials’ political discourse in the future.  
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Gierzynski, Anthony and Kathryn Eddy. Harry Potter and the Millennials. Baltimore, MD: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 2013. 
 
P 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  301 
DOMINIC J. NARDI received his Ph.D. in Political Science from the University of 
Michigan and currently teaches at George Washington University. He has edited 
books about Star Wars TV shows (2020) and Dune (2022), and is working on a book 
about Studio Ghibli films as adaptations (2025). He has also written about politics 
and identity in Blade Runner, The Lord of the Rings, and Star Trek. 
 
 
 
MAGIC , MAGICIANS AND DETECTIVE FICTION : ESSAYS ON 
INTERSECTING MODES OF MYSTERY . Edited by Rebecca Josephy. 
Jefferson; McFarland & Co., Inc, 2025. 240 pp. ISBN: 978 -1-4766-8820-6. $65.00 
(paperback). 
 
HIS ESSAY COLLECTION OFFERS NINE CHAPTERS  exploring how magic 
(primarily the performance variety) intersects with detective fiction. Three 
chapters apply the typology of magic to detective fiction, three consider 
overlapping spaces between detective fiction and magic (magicians who solve 
crimes, etc.), and three showcase international (Japanese, Russian, Mexican) 
authors using magic in detective stories. 
The second section offers the most useful material for scholars 
interested in Inklings -adjacent Dorothy L. Sayers and other Golden Age 
detective writers. Beatrice Ashton -Lelliott discusses Victorian -era magicians 
who were seen simultaneously as rogues and detectives (93–111), Christopher 
Pittard explores the magician antagonist Colonel Clay in Grant Allen’s novel The 
African Millionaire  (112–130), and Rebecca Josephy considers how Maurice 
Leblanc applies magical descriptors to Arsène Lupin (131–154). Josephy’s essay 
offers an interesting counterpoint to claims that the detective story is inherently 
religious when she argues that magic shows and detective stories follow similar 
structures. “The genre, like the magic show, becomes a pseudo -religious 
narrative iterative experience: a new, modern, and scientifically advanced opiate 
for the post -enlightened masses” (149). Whether religious authors l ike Sayers, 
Ronald Knox, and G.K. Chesterton turned the would-be opiate into a channel to 
re-enchant the masses is of course up for discussion. 
Other fruitful insights for Golden Age fans appear in Zi -Ling Yan’s 
chapter in the typology section (13 –39). Yan applies Robert Neale’s five -tier 
typology of magic to detective fiction: the tiers range “from primary magic (the 
self-unaware predisposition to magical thinking) to reflexive magic (a fully self-
aware experience or meta-magic)” (21). If applied t o fiction, Neale’s tiers show 
how detective stories offer a spectrum of magical content (proven or disproven 
T 
Reviews 
302  Mythlore 146, Spring/Summer 2025 
 
supernatural causes?) and a spectrum of attitudes toward magic (is the final plot 
reveal not unlike a magic show?). For example, Yan places Sayers’s Lord Peter 
Wimsey despairing of justice prevailing in Murder Must Advertise and Unnatural 
Death in the final tier, “works that interrogate the magical effect in a serious 
mode,” questioning whether the detective can perform the desired magic trick 
to conquer evil (31). 
While Yan does not mention Charles Williams when discussing the 
second tier, which features ritual magic (22–25), his discussion of characters like 
Sax Rohmer’s Moris Klaw shows why Williams is under -discussed in crime 
fiction studies. War in Heaven may be a detective story (see Higgins, “A Christian 
Detective Story?”), and Williams admitted that Rohmer inspired him to write 
his first novel (Lobdell 104), but his approach fits outside Rohmer’s occult 
detective formula. The occult detective tale explores “cause-and-effect relations” 
involving paranormal forces that are “strictly retributive” if crossed. 
Neutralizing these forces requires “identifying sources of contamination and 
conducting purification rites”; since the contamination is usually something 
exotically foreign “best purged […] from the national body,” occult detective 
stories ultimately if “surreptitiously defend political, racial, class and gendered 
interests” (24). Williams rarely connects paranormal activity to “bad karma” and 
would rather comp licate than affirm national visions of foreignness (see the 
ambiguous Nigel Considine in Shadows of Ecstasy ) or gender (see Nyman on 
Williams’s complex female figures). Williams writes detective stories about 
magic but evades easy cliches, which also means he evades easily labeled genre 
categories. 
These essays offer useful ideas for scholars thinking about Sayers, 
Williams, and their associates as detective writers interested in magic, but little 
direct discussion. The focus is very much on performance magic over ritual 
magic (no references to Willi ams, almost no references to Aleister Crowley’s 
crime stories). The focus is also very much on American authors over British 
ones (Chesterton only gets mentioned in one of Yan’s footnotes [37], and in 
passing when Tobin discusses Chesterton scholar Martin Gardner [47]). 
That said, the book offers fresh content on two under-discussed figures 
adjacent to Sayers and the Inklings. Neil Tobin contributes two essays, one on 
detective fiction authors who explored performance magic (40–63) and the other 
on performance magicians who solve crimes in detective stories (64 –90). Both 
essays extensively discuss John Dickson Carr, much influenced by Chesterton 
and much supported by Sayers. Carr was also friends with William Lindsay 
Gresham, Joy Davidman’s ex-husband and author of the crime novel Nightmare 
Alley. While often mentioned in Davidman scholarship or discussions of 
Nightmare Alley adaptations, few crime fiction studies analyze Gresham. Tobin’s 
two pages discussing Gresham’s crime fiction and friendships with Carr, 
Reviews 
Mythlore 43.2, Spring/Summer 2025  303 
Clayton Rawson, and Bruce Elliot (49 –50) might be the first time an academic 
book has discussed Gresham as a crime writer since Charles Shapiro’s 1968 
essay. Carr is better -known but limited academic work has been published on 
him beyond Douglas G. Greene’s 1995 biography. 
Readers interested in the Detection Club will be disappointed by Magic, 
Magicians and Detective Fiction , but it does fill in some important gaps in the 
American detective fiction conversation. Read alongside existing scholarship, it 
may help scholars wanting to bridge Carr and Chesterton, Williams and Sayers, 
and other topics that intersect detective fiction with magic or myth. 
 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Greene, Douglas G. John Dickson Carr: The Man Who Explained Miracles. Simon & Schuster, 1995. 
Higgins, Sørina. “Is a ‘Christian’ Mystery Story Possible? Charles Williams’s War in Heaven 
as a Generic Case Study.” Mythlore vol. 30, no. 1, #115/116, 2011, pp. 77–90. 
Lobdell, Jared. The Detective Fiction Reviews of Charles Williams, 1930–1935. McFarland, 2003. 
Nyman, Amy. “A Feminist Perspective in Williams’ Novels.” Mythlore #46, vol. 12, no. 4,  
1986, pp. 3–10. 
Shapiro, Charles. “Nightmare Alley: Geeks, Cons, Tips, and Marks.” Tough Guy Writers of 
the Thirties edited by David Madden. Southern Illinois UP, 1968, pp. 218–24.  
 
G. CONNOR SALTER has a Bachelor of Science in Professional Writing from Taylor 
University. He has spoken on Inklings topics on several occasions, including “William 
Lindsay Gresham: Writer, Magician, Seeker” (November 3, 2023) and “The Lion and the 
Vampire: The Inklings a nd English Horror Films in Conversation,” (October 29, 2021), 
both for Inkling Folk Fellowship. He has contributed to many publications, including CSL: 
The Bulletin of the New York C.S. Lewis Society , The Lamp -Post, Fellowship & Fairydust, The 
Oddest Inkling , and A Pilgrim in Narnia . His recent work includes “William Lindsay 
Gresham and Norse Poetry: A Surprising Discovery,” (CSL, vol. 55, no. 1) and “Tellers of 
Dark Fairy Tales: Common Themes in the Works of C.S. Lewis and Terence Fisher” 
(Mythlore vol. 41, no. 1). 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
 
 
Patrick Wynne 
 
A note on the cover design:  
The Mythopoeic Society has long used an inward-oriented triskelion design as its logo. In Mythlore 
#3 (July 1969), editor Glen GoodKnight reproduced a sketch by BG Callahan which labels the three 
arms to represent J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and Charles Williams, and identifies them with the 
authors’ key concepts of, respectively, Eucatastrophe, Sehnsucht, and Romantic Theology, all 
leading to Joy at the center. Starting with issue #142, Mythlore’s cover features a plurality of 
outward-reaching triskelions, which  represent an open and inclusive approach to mythopoeic 
fantasy, still centered on the Joy it brings us as readers and scholars, and still anchored by, but 
quite rightly reaching well beyond, our original core three authors. The open source triskelion 
design used on the cover and interior of the journal is https://openclipart.org/ 
detail/278014/triskel by roshellin. 
 
A note on the type: 
The main body of the text of Mythlore is set in Palatino Linotype, a balanced and graceful lyrical 
modernist face created in 1948 by Hermann Zapf and based on humanist Renaissance designs. It 
was initially cut by hand and cast as a foundry type, even though phototype machines and early 
computers were in use at the time. This combination of modernism and deliberate anachronism, as 
well as the date of the type’s design, makes Palatino especially suitable for studies of the works of 
Tolkien, Lewis, Williams, a nd other modern fantasists. Mythlore first started using Palatino in 
1988, when it switched to computer typesetting. Starting in 1989 a face called Tolkien, adapted 
from Kelt, was used for titling for a number of years but later phased out. We have returned to 
Tolkien for titles and other accents in 2007. 
 
  

 
 
MYTHLORE  Submission Guidelines  
 
Mythlore is a refereed scholarly journal , available in print, electronic, 
and online open access formats.  Mythlore welcomes submissions 
focusing on the works and scholarship of J.R.R. Tolkien, C.S. Lewis, and 
Charles Williams, as well as articles on other authors and creators of 
mythic and mythopoeic literature  and media. We invite articles from 
all critical perspectives. All published articles have been recommended 
by at least one referee; in the case of authors connected with the journal 
or on the Society’s board, a minimum of two recommendations is 
required. Notes and reviews are not refereed. A more detailed  
statement of editorial purpose is available at 
http://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/aimsandscope.html 
 
All submissions for publication should conform to The MLA Handbook 
9th ed. (New York: Modern Language Association, 2021), include a list 
of works cited, and normally should be 5,000-10,000 words. A detailed 
style guide  can be found at  https://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/ 
style_sheet.pdf. Reviews of books should be 1,000-5,000 words. Please 
inquire with the editor before submitting book reviews or shorter 
Notes. Letters are also welcome. Submissions should be formatted as 
Microsoft Word or plain ASCII text files and submitted by setting up 
an author account at  http://dc.swosu.edu/mythlore/. Authors may 
expect a decision regarding publication within six to nine months. 
 
Janet Brennan Croft 
Editor, Mythlore 
University of Northern Iowa 
Rod Library 213A 
Cedar Falls, IA 50614 
mythlore@mythsoc.org 
janet.croft@uni.edu 
 