 

 (PDF) Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games | Antero Garcia - Academia.edu 

 Skip to main content

 Academia.edu no longer supports Internet Explorer.

 To browse Academia.edu and the wider internet faster and more securely, please take a few seconds to  upgrade your browser .

 Log In Sign Up Log In Sign Up more  Job Board About Press Blog People Papers Terms Privacy Copyright  We're Hiring!  Help Center less  

 Download Free PDF Download Free PDF Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games Mind, Culture, and Activity, 2017 Antero Garcia Download with Google Download with Facebook or create a free account to download Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games Download Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games Antero Garcia Mind, Culture, and Activity

 ISSN: 1074-9039 (Print) 1532-7884 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/hmca20

Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How
Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in
Tabletop Role-Playing Games

Antero Garcia

To cite this article: Antero Garcia (2017) Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How
Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games, Mind, Culture, and
Activity, 24:3, 232-246, DOI: 10.1080/10749039.2017.1293691

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2017.1293691

 Published online: 07 Apr 2017.

 Submit your article to this journal

 Article views: 438

 View related articles

 View Crossmark data

 Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
 http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=hmca20
MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY
2017, VOL. 24, NO. 3, 232–246
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2017.1293691

Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape
Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games
Antero Garcia
Stanford University

 ABSTRACT
 This article takes a cultural-historical approach to analyzing how systems shape
 the assumptions, identities, and experiences of their users. Focusing on how the
 tabletop role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons is built on a system of play that
 has grown and shifted over the course of 40 years, this study emphasizes the
 central role that systems play in mediating the experiences of participants. By
 focusing on depictions of gender, race, and power in Dungeons & Dragons—as a
 singular cultural practice—this study highlights how researchers must attend to
 cultural production both around and within systems.

 Once upon a time, long, long ago, in a realm called the midwestern United States—specifically the states
 of Minnesota and Wisconsin—a group of friends gathered together to forever alter the history of gaming.
 — Preface, Dungeons & Dragons Player’s Handbook Fifth Edition (Wizards of the Coast, 2014a, p. 4)

 Forty years since the official release of the world’s first role-playing game (RPG), Dungeons &
Dragons (D&D; Arneson & Gygax, 1974), the preface to the fifth edition of the game invokes a self-
created mythology of how the system’s midwestern creators defined a genre of play. Since its
creation by gamers Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson, D&D has spawned numerous editions, playing
variants, and other gaming systems. In addition, as the harbinger of an entire genre of codified
tabletop play and video game tropes, D&D has significantly shaped the landscape of pop culture as
portrayed in books, on screens (big and small), and via gaming consoles. The group of friends that
“forever alter[ed]” the landscape of gaming and pop culture did so through the authorship of a rules
system that dictated the constraints and ideologies for meaning making within RPGs.
 As a system for “collaborative creation” within a fantasy-focused virtual world, D&D is an analog
toolset for group production of cultural artifacts, narratives, and expressions of agency. The rules of
D&D function as “constituents of culture” (Cole, 1998, p. 292), as they are artifacts that mediate
group understanding and individual learning. In D&D, a group of players mutually construct and
enact stories within a shared and pervasive “virtual world” (Boellstorff, Nardi, Pearce, & Taylor,
2012; Hine, 2011). With emphasis on tactical combat, narrative development, and spatial explora-
tion, D&D illustrates powerful possibilities for socialization and learning. It also highlights key
tropes in games—both digital and nondigital—that followed in its footsteps. From concepts of
“leveling up” to “hit points” to classes of characters frequently chosen in online RPGs, D&D has
shaped the landscape of games, learning, and virtual world exploration. It is also largely influenced
by the designers’ mutual passion for wargaming and for fantasy and science fiction pulp stories.
These influences were embedded into the assumptions of D&D’s system mechanics (Peterson, 2012).
Particularly considering that D&D has shaped formative learning experiences of myriad gaming
enthusiasts over the past 40 years of its existence, as well as its osmotic reflection in popular media

CONTACT Antero Garcia antero.garcia@stanford.edu Stanford University Graduate School of Education, 485 Lasuen Mall,
Stanford, CA 94305.

© 2017 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 233

today from World of Warcraft to Game of Thrones to its formative influence on acclaimed novelists
like Junot Diaz (Schnelbach, 2016) and Ta-Nehisi Coates (2011), this article takes a cultural-
historical perspective at how the systems that drive D&D’s rules have shaped cultural understanding
and learning within the game.
 With collaborative creation at the origin of D&D, as well as key to how players explore and
construct meaning within the D&D system, the values and influences that are embedded within the
game must be excavated. In particular, D&D’s role in shaping a history of symbolic violence in
gaming culture is a legacy that is acknowledged but not empirically interrogated. In the context that
this study was enmeshed, the systems of play were embroiled in “gamergate”: “an online mob
ostensibly about ‘ethics in gaming journalism’ that primarily targeted women for harassment”
(Hurley, 2016, p. 15). By unpacking the embedded nature of inequality as related to games, gender,
and race, this study helps explore conceptions and enactment of power in games and in broader
gaming culture (Anthropy, 2012; Shaw, 2014). Ultimately, this study’s emphasis on understanding
the foundational depictions of race, gender, and power in a nondigital gaming system highlights how
cultural-historical approaches to understanding learning within systems must begin with an under-
standing of the implicit biases of these systems. Further, this article’s emphasis on how culturally
constructed gaming systems shape the meaning making and experiences of their gaming commu-
nities speaks more broadly to the methodological challenges of studying systems and how they shape
the communities around them.
 Gutiérrez and Rogoff (2003) reminded us that “people live culture in a mutually constitutive
manner in which it is not fruitful to tote up their characteristics as if they occur independently of
culture, and of culture as if it occurs independently of people” (p. 21). If people, as participants in
D&D, mediate lives and experiences within the virtual world of the game, the ways this world is
bound by culturally informed rules systems play a significant role in shaping the experience and
limitations on players’ experiences. With this in mind, this study seeks to unpack the following
questions:

 ● How are gender, race, and power defined explicitly and implicitly within the rules system of D&D?
 ● How do these constructions of gender, race, and power reflect the influences on the gaming system?
 ● How do these constructions shape player experiences within D&D virtual worlds in both the
 past and present?

 By understanding the embedded values of virtual worlds, this study explores how systems shape
specific forms of play. In doing so, this study illustrates Cole, Goncu, and Vadeboncoeur’s (2015)
claim that “cultural-historical and activity theory are approaches that investigate the past, as well as
the present” (p. 1). Specifically, in looking at how a group of gaming creators 40 years ago continue
to shape cultural meaning making in the present, I link systems of the past with their human authors
and the biases they implicitly carry into their work. As Gall (1977) explained, systems are made by
people and attract “systems-people” (p. 47).
 Although this study confines its research to a singular (though changing over time) system of
nondigital play, I enter this work to highlight how a cultural-historical approach can reveal proble-
matic biases and assumptions within systems at large. How social constructions of schooling,
informal learning environments, and exploration in gaming communities are mediated by systems
of the past reveals potentially problematic blind spots for researchers in these spaces.
 Reading historically across all of the editions of D&D published over the past 40 years—11 official
D&D editions, as well as an additional “nonofficial” version—this article tracks how the rules that
guide “the world’s most popular roleplaying game” (Paizo Publishing, 2009, p. 4) reinforce assump-
tions of race and gender within tabletop gaming communities. To be clear, although I cast a critical
eye at constructions of masculinity and femininity as depicted within the game, I do so recognizing
that these constructions moved alongside, as well as reinforced, the temporal depictions of men and
women in popular culture from the 1970s to the present. Clearly, particularly within a gaming
234 A. GARCIA

system that rewards players’ imaginations, there are exceptions and shifts toward equity and
inclusivity within gaming communities. However, the base ideological assumptions of D&D high-
light how gaming culture alone is not the sole influence on the experiences of women within gaming
communities; these experiences have been cultivated from embedded assumptions within the rules of
D&D. To illustrate this point, I specifically look at conceptions of race and gender within D&D based
on the text written, images displayed, and the noted influences across the editions. Ultimately, I enter
this work seeking to understand the assumptions of these gaming systems and the methodological
implications such systems have on the study of virtual worlds, their cultures, and their “communities
of play” (Pearce & Artemesia, 2009).

Systems at work
D&D like other games, both digital and nondigital, is governed by a system of mechanics. The
system of rules and constraints dictates what play means and how it is conducted. These complex
“systems at work” (Bar-Yam, 2005) both replicate and model lived experiences while separating play
from normal, nongaming activity. Arguably, whereas digital games adjudicate rules within the black
box of computer code, human intuition, thinking, and interpretation supervise play in nondigital
contexts such as playing D&D around a table. In considering how systems are overseen by
individuals, particularly in the context of nondigital gameplay, O’Connor, Peck, and Cafarella’s
(2015) examination of how students navigate institutions of higher education reminds us that
systems are layered with computational rules, guidelines, and instructions—“and yet humanity and
subjectivity are always present” (p. 178). In particular, O’Connor et al.’s comment—originally within
the context of exploring engineering students’ course pathways—reminds researchers that culturally
mediated spaces are constructed from the primordial soup of human knowledge and social biases.
Despite the thousands of pages of rules (or millions of lines of code in digital contexts), these are
systems made by individuals and for individuals.
 Considering their creation by individuals, biases and inherent inequalities are both consciously
and unconsciously embedded within systems. As argued in ongoing scholarship related to critical
cyberculture (Silver & Massanari, 2006), foundational questions of oppression and exclusion in
online contexts must foreground how scholars explore and unpack meaning in online and virtual
environments. For example, Daniels (2013) contends that Internet-related research must acknowl-
edge “the persistence of racism online while simultaneously recognizing the deep roots of racial
inequality in existing social structures that shape technoculture” (p. 711). Likewise, De La Peña
(2010) traced a lineage of scholarship detailing how “racial difference and whiteness are constructed
through technology” (p. 924). Although the research in this article focuses on systems designed in
the 1970s not intended to connect to online networks, the critical emphasis on how inequalities—
particularly around race and gender—are embedded in cultural systems remains vital. Contexts of
gaming are—like the Internet—“embedded in material, corporeal lives in complex ways” (Daniels,
2009, p. 117). This critical cyberculture research points to a further need for understanding the
cultural and historical approaches to understanding nondigital gaming. The learning, meaning-
making, and cultural mediation that happens within contexts governed by systems of rules—gaming,
schooling, and broader communities of practice, for example—require researchers to consider how
the cultural-historical repertoires (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003) embedded within these systems affect
what is produced and understood in these spaces. Rather than simply looking at how sexist practices
or racial discrimination happen within and around online video game communities, this study
suggests that these practices could be embedded within systems of play.
 Further, as previously noted, gaming systems create spaces for cultural production that are safely
ensconced from the rest of the world; Huizinga (1955) described this space as the “magic circle,”
noting that play stands “consciously outside ‘ordinary’ life as being ‘not serious,’ but at the same time
absorbing the player utensil and utterly” (p. 13). Salen and Zimmerman (2004) elaborated on this
concept, noting that this magic circle is “a special place in time and space created by a game” (p. 95).
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 235

 As both a part of and beside traditional cultural norms, the magic circle inscribes a space that is
culturally productive and built on the foundation of past production. Missing in most analysis of the
magic circle is the interloper within the space: the gaming system itself. As products of the specific
cultural and temporal locations in which they are produced, games carry with them their own ethics and
values. As systems that dictate these values, games are “social technologies” (Flanagan, 2009, p. 9).
 Like the technologies that mediate today’s “networked society” (Castells, 1996), the social technologies
of gaming do not remain static. Their systems are updated and iterated upon such that they reflect changes
in contemporary society’s relationship with these games. D&D, for example, has gone through a dozen
systemic “editions” that have refined, altered, or clarified what play within the system entails.
 In describing games as “social technologies,” Flanagan noted that
 games, functioning as an ordering logic—a machine, or a technology—for creating social relations, work to
 distill or abstract the everyday actions of the players into easy-to-understand instruments where context is
 defamiliarized just enough to allow Huizinga’s magic circle of play to manifest. (p. 9)

 The opportunities for transgressive social play (Salen & Zimmerman, 2004) are limited only by
the imagination of players and the constraints of what a gaming system will allow; how a game is
designed “carries implications for the social group” playing it (Flanagan, 2009, p. 9). However,
although systems encourage iteration and systems change over time, the ideological assumptions
underneath them largely do not.
 Considering that games, as systems, are foundationally built on human beliefs and ideas, concerns
about who authors these games and with what blind spots is particularly worrisome. Aligned with
Vossoughi, Hooper, and Escude’s (2016) concern about cultural depictions of making, the need for
“interrogating what is recognized as making” (p. 214), looking at the underpinnings of gaming systems is
imperative. As cultural artifacts and social technologies, games are deeply embedded within the beliefs of
the individuals who created them. Further, despite the limitations of who is characteristically playing and
making games like D&D, the forms of learning within these systems can be robust.

Dungeons & Dragons as a system for cultural production
To contextualize this study’s emphasis on tabletop role playing and the broader gaming culture it
falls within, I offer a brief history of D&D and acknowledge that lengthier histories of this game and
its influence provide additional nuance (e.g., Peterson, 2012; Witwer, 2015). D&D, the first commer-
cially released RPG, was first published in 1974 as three booklets authored by Dave Arneson and
Gary Gygax. As described in the first Players Handbook (Gygax, 1978), D&D is “a fantasy game of
role playing which relies upon the imagination of participants, for it is certainly make-believe, yet it
is so interesting, so challenging, so mind-unleashing that it comes near reality” (p. 7). Although
D&D spawned many other games within the genre it established, it did not remain static. Three
years after its first release, D&D published two different, updated versions of its rules system.
Gygax’s Advanced Dungeons and Dragons (1977, 1978, 1979) and the Eric Holmes–revised “basic”
Dungeons & Dragons (Gygax & Arneson, 1977) gave players opportunties to extend the basic rules
system and clarify the fundamentals of play for individuals new to the game. Following these
releases, D&D’s publishers would release newer editions of the game at irregular intervals to correct
and update the system, as well as to shore up a bevy of sales of the newly released books.
 Regardless of which edition of the game is explored, the fundamentals of how to play D&D still
revolve around the basic functions and beliefs of what adventure and storytelling look like. D&D, as a
system for collaborative storytelling, is built around three primary modes of play and narrative
development. As most clearly articulated in the 2014 release of the game’s fifth edition, D&D’s
“three pillars of adventure” are “exploration,” “social interaction,” and “combat” (Wizards of the
Coast, 2014a, p. 8). Like the assumptions D&D’s designers situated about race and gender within
the gaming system, the forms of play and the ideologies it established shifted from one edition to
another.
236 A. GARCIA

 Although the virtual worlds of D&D have been significantly expanded with optional books, spin-
off novels, and other gaming material, analysis in this article focuses on the “how to play” guides of
the “basic” editions of D&D and The Player’s Handbook for various editions of the game across its
40-year history. These are the texts that nearly every player purchases and reads in order to play
D&D; changes in ideology and representation are tracked in these foundational books.
 While this article follows the development of D&D across 40 years, one significant addition is
included in the figure above: Pathfinder (2009). With the release of the third edition of D&D, its
publisher, Wizards of the Coast, encouraged third-party publishers and enthusiasts to legally publish
and sell materials connected to the rules system of D&D. The Open Gaming License allowed for
additions to and changes around the existing D&D ruleset. With a large contingent of D&D players
disappointed by the changes to the rules found in the 2008 fourth edition of D&D, Paizo Publishing
met this audience’s needs by forging a new path for loyal D&D players: They released Pathfinder as a
revised version of the 3.5 edition’s ruleset. For the years after fourth edition’s release, Pathfinder was
the most popular RPG being bought and played (ICv2., 2013). Although not technically a D&D
product and published by a different company, the Pathfinder system is seen within the contem-
porary history of tabletop RPGs as an extension of the D&D ruleset and—even while D&D fifth
edition is the top-selling RPG at the time that I write this—Pathfinder continues to support a large
number of players of D&D.
 In the 40 years since its release, the influence that D&D has had on popular, Western culture is
profound. From influencing the designs of myriad video game titles and tropes (Harris, 2015;
Kushner, 2004) to shaping the experiences of the aforementioned literary superstars, D&D has
seeped into multiple facets of culture. Flowing along the same veins that course with inspiration
from slaying dragons and liberating societies of mythical beings are the designed depictions of
women, race, and power within the D&D system.

Methodology
Context for study
In considering the gap between studying learning within games and the roots of cultural stereotypes and
symbolic violence happening around games, this article is part of a larger study focusing on learning and
language practices within tabletop gaming communities. In 2014, I embarked on ethnographic research
of player communities of tabletop role-playing communities in Northern Colorado. Over the course of
24 months, I participated in and socialized with myriad individuals engaged in public RPG communities.
Following a lineage of ethnography within virtual world environments (Boellstorff, 2008; Chen, 2011;
Dibbell, 1999; Nardi, 2010; Pearce & Artemesia, 2009), my fieldwork in this space focused on the
interactions between players both in-game and “around the table,” as well as how broader Internet-
driven networks of fandom shaped the localized experiences at my table. Recognizing that virtual worlds
“are inherently performative spaces” (Pearce & Artemesia, 2009, p. 59), studying these games meant
playing these games as well.
 While conducting research within the virtual worlds created in D&D and other systems, it became
clear that the foundations on which these games were established shaped the context of identities of
players and their actions within the worlds. Noting that the systems of play guided the kinds of
actions I observed in my data, this article’s analysis of the existing depictions of race, gender, and
power within D&D uses Flanagan’s (2009) frame of games as “social technologies” as a primary
conceptual framework.

Unarchiving humanity within the D&D system
For this study I read and annotated the primary rule books for D&D for each of the 12 editions listed in
Table 1, as well as the wargaming text Chainmail (Gygax & Perren, 1971) that functioned as the
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 237

 Table 1. Editions of Dungeons & Dragons.
 Year Released Edition Published
 1974 Original Dungeons & Dragons
 1977 “Advanced” Dungeons & Dragons
 1977 “Basic” Dungeons & Dragons
 1981 Revised “basic” edition
 1983 Re-revised “basic” edition
 1989 “Advanced” second edition
 1991 Re-revised “basic” edition
 2000 Third edition
 2003 3.5 edition
 2008 Fourth edition
 2009 Pathfinder
 2014 Fifth edition

mechanical rules for the 1974 release of the game. The primary rule books for D&D—starting with the
1977 Advanced edition—are three books: the Players Handbook (PHB), the Dungeon Masters Guide
(DMG), and the Monster Manual (MM). Taken together, these three books are the primary rules for
how to play and have been subsequently released as a trio for every edition of D&D since 1977. The four
“basic” editions of D&D simplified all of the rules into a single boxed product. These texts have gotten
longer over time. Whereas the complete original version of D&D was a mere 110 folded, pamphlet-sized
pages, the most recent PHB is 316 pages in length. For Pathfinder, a single (and hefty) 575-page Core
Rulebook combines the PHB and DMG material. In total, I read and compared more than 5,500 pages of
text across the versions of the game. This study’s emphasis is on specific explanations of race, gender,
and power and significantly limited the areas of cross analysis within the books.
 After reading the texts, I looked at how issues of representation are addressed directly and
indirectly, including gendered pronouns within the text and images of race and gender. As explained
next, I specifically counted each individual represented within the pages of the book to quantify
representation whenever possible.
 A note before moving forward with the analysis in this article: Undeniably, both gender and race are
complex. Particularly in the context of this study’s emphasis on gaming culture’s complicated and
stifling relationship with feminist critique and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ)
participants (Hurley, 2016), I recognize that gender is not a binary construction, and the analysis that
follows does not argue as such. Likewise, although I do examine the images of individuals as depicted
across editions of D&D, I do not believe that one’s gender identity can be interpreted solely based on its
depiction in pictures. However, considering the often egregious depictions of scantily clad women
adorning the covers of fantasy and science fiction texts (that both inspire and have been inspired by
D&D), the male gaze guides cultural distinctions of feminine performance within the virtual worlds of
play. As such, the analysis that follows explores how these images reinforce what being female looks like
within D&D. In the cases of images that are ambiguously gendered by artists and that do not have
captions to clarify, I have given the books the benefit of the doubt and added these images as inclusive of
representing females; as a result, the figures that follow may be slightly skewed to include more female
representation than was intended within the pages of the books.

Findings
Gender construction and representation in D&D
Whether in basements, friends’ living rooms, or the early gaming conventions organized by Gygax
and friends, D&D was developed out of the wargaming communities comprised largely of White
men, their complex rules systems, and their toys (Laws, 2007; Peterson, 2012; Witwer, 2015). By the
time the first rulebook of D&D was released, the male-dominated genre—despite the game being
playtested by Gygax’s daughter (Witwer, 2015)—erased female players from within the purview of
the book.
238 A. GARCIA

 The first of the three books in the original D&D release was called Men & Magic. Likewise, the
actual text refers to players using only male pronouns, beginning with the section labeled
“Preparation for the Campaign”: “The referee bears the entire burden here, but if care and thought
are used, the reward will more than repay him” (p. 3). Reinforcing the invisibility of female players
within the rules of D&D, the three types of characters that players could choose were “Fighting-
Men,” “Magic-Users,” and “Clerics.” Further, though there are distinctions between humans and
other fantasy races like dwarves and elves, the rules distinctly note the options for “men” in terms of
class features and the alignment they can choose (i.e., the moral code the characters follow). As the
instantiation of rules they developed among male friends, Arneson and Gygax’s original rules reflect
an absence of women.
 By the time the first “Advanced” D&D rules were released 4 years later, women were acknowl-
edged, but in limited and troubling ways. In the foreword to the first Players Handbook (Gygax,
1978), Mike Carr wrote that “D&D players, happily, come in all shapes and sizes, and even a fair
number of women are counted among those who regularly play the game—making Dungeons &
Dragons somewhat special in this regard” (p. 2). With the third sentence of the book, Carr attempts
to draw women into the gaming genre, though the “even” exceptionalizes and exoticizes female
players around the largely male-dominated space.
 Further, the 1978 edition of D&D carries on the tradition of utilizing male pronouns but explains this
decision:

 Although the masculine form of appellation is typically used when listing the level titles of the various types of
 characters, these names can easily be changed to the feminine if desired. This is fantasy—what’s in a name? In
 all but a few cases sex makes no difference to ability! (p. 7)

 One of the places where the choice of a character’s sex does make a difference is in physical ability. As
demonstrated in a table (p. 9) depicting the maximum strength for characters, females have lower
strength than males. In a system where you can be an elf, cast powerful spells, and barter with dragons,
the notion that women could be as strong—if not stronger—than men was too preposterous to be
developed within the system. This shift is striking because Gygax had to intentionally develop a system
that diminished the power of women within the game. This was a system that was developed within the
revision of the game with several years to develop this iteration of the system.
 Although the strength restrictions were removed in later editions, the ever-expanding complexity of the
game meant that players were given a chart to consider the height and weight of the characters they played.
As the text helpfully explains, “Females tend to be lighter and shorter than males. Thus, the base numbers
for height and weight are divided into male/female values” (p. 33).
 Fifteen years after the game’s inception, an important change in the second edition (Cook, 1989) only
exacerbated how pronouns were acknowledged. Addressing the use of the male pronoun, Cook wrote,

 The male pronoun (he, him, his) is used exclusively throughout the AD&D game rules. We hope this won’t be
 construed by anyone to be an attempt to exclude females from the game or imply their exclusion. Centuries of use have
 neutered the male pronoun. In written material it is clear, concise, and familiar. Nothing else is [emphasis added]. (p. 9)

 Explanations about pronouns would cease with later editions of D&D, starting with the third
(Wizards of the Coast, 2000).
 When Pathfinder was published in 2009, the Core Rulebook—and the books that followed its publication
—focused on 11 “iconic” characters. Every time a fighter is shown in Pathfinder’s products it is always the
same fighter: Valeros. This decision made depicting characters easy to recognize and created engaging
transmedia narratives for Pathfinder players to follow from one text to another. More important, of the 11
initial core iconic characters in Pathfinder, six are female and are described with female pronouns. Notably,
additional official Pathfinder books highlight that several of their iconic characters identify as part of the
LGBTQ community including the shaman, Shadra—Pathfinder’s first transgender iconic character.
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 239

Picturing women in D&D
The shifts in the D&D rules over four decades highlight efforts from the game’s designers to better
acknowledge and bring in female players; this is despite the roots of “toxic pathologies” traced in the
representation of the female body in D&D (Trammell, 2014).
 Table 2 shows the number of images within the D&D core rulebooks that represent human and
humanlike (i.e., elves, dwarves, etc.) characters. Within these images, I counted the total number of
characters represented and the number of women within these. For example, if a photo illustrates a
brawl with six figures and one of these individuals appears female, it is counted as a picture that
includes women but also adds only one female to the total number of individuals represented in the
book; a picture can both increase the percentage of figures featuring women and decrease the
percentage of total women represented in the book. The numbers in this table, then, highlight
both the percentage of pictures that include women and the total number of women within the book
compared to men.
 A few important considerations regarding this chart: The 1974 edition of D&D appears to have
substantially higher number of women than some of the editions that immediately followed it; only
the 1981 and 1983 editions have higher percentages until the 2000 release of the third edition.
However, this is because there were so few pictures within the book in the first place. Further, of the
four figures including women in this book, three of these characters are “witches,” one is “medusa,”
and one is a topless “exotic amazon.” Just because women are represented within this edition does
not mean that they are represented powerfully.
 Similarly, in the first and second editions of the game (those editions that specifically utilized the
male pronoun throughout), although there were some women in the book, these images were
frequently of women in scantily clad, sexualized attire or women in diminutive and powerless
positions. For example, a somewhat typical image from the game’s second edition shows a boy
and girl cowering from a terror in the sky.
 In looking at the percentages in Table 2, it appears that women are more prominently featured in the
“basic” editions of D&D. With substantially simplified rules and limited options, these basic editions
were useful beginning sources for players new to the mechanics of RPG. In seeing a representation gap
between the basic and advanced versions of D&D, the publishers implicitly invite the question, which is
discussed next, which games and which versions of these games are for whom?

Table 2. Total number of women included across historical editions of Dungeons & Dragons.
 Year Images No. of Images That % of Images Total No. of Total No. of % of
 Released Edition Published With People Include Women With Women People Shown Women Women
 1974 Original Dungeons 18 4 22.22% 27 6 22.22%
 & Dragons
 1977 “Advanced” 30 4 13.33% 80 4 5.00%
 Dungeons &
 Dragons
 1977 “Basic” Dungeons & 9 1 11.11% 18 2 11.11%
 Dragons
 1981 Revised “basic” 11 6 54.55% 27 8 29.63%
 edition
 1983 Re-revised “basic” 26 10 38.46% 40 10 25.00%
 edition
 1989 “Advanced” second 45 8 17.78% 77 8 10.39%
 edition
 1991 Re-revised “basic” 23 8 34.78% 37 8 21.62%
 edition
 2000 Third edition 48 17 35.42% 75 23 30.67%
 2003 3.5 edition 45 16 35.56% 70 23 32.86%
 2008 Fourth edition 61 34 55.74% 101 38 37.62%
 2009 Pathfinder 82 51 62.20% 151 66 43.71%
 2014 Fifth edition 77 42 54.55% 148 56 37.84%
240 A. GARCIA

 Perhaps following in the path forged by Pathfinder, the fifth edition significantly increases the
number of images of women, and qualitatively the women within the book are not as sexualized or
placed in positions of terror as in previous editions. As these findings shift from looking at
constructions of gender in D&D toward considering what race means within the rules, it is necessary
to pause and consider that nearly all of the heroic characters—regardless of gender—are depicted as
thin and able-bodied within the Players Handbooks of the various editions. Although these texts have
moved to including a closer balance of participants, they have also done so while largely casting
images around traditional, Western notions of beauty. In large part, as noted next, this primarily
includes privileging whiteness as well.

Race and being “partially human” in D&D
Race, racism, and the cultural lessons that D&D teaches about innate feelings of distrust for
individuals different from oneself are complicated. Fundamentally, race in D&D does not mean
what it typically means in educational research. Instead, the races of D&D are largely a binary of
“human” or “demi-human”—the humanlike characters that players can don within the game. Since
its first release, players could become elves, dwarves, and halflings (Arneson & Gygax, 1974, pp. 7–8).
Over the editions of the game, these options expanded to include other fantasy races such as gnomes
and half-orcs. Although the rulebooks state that humans are the most common race found within
the default world of D&D, there are many racial choices that players can make. Diversity breeds
choice within the D&D system.
 In the “basic” editions of D&D, race was simplified. Players would choose to be either a human,
with class options (like magic-user, fighter, etc.), or a nonhuman character like an elf or dwarf:
 Most D&D characters are humans. A human can be a Cleric, Fighter, Magic-User, or Thief. Humans are the
 most widespread of all intelligent beings.
 A character may also be a non-human: a Dwarf, Elf, or Halfling. Each of these classes is also a separate race of
 beings. They are all commonly known as “Demi-humans,” because they seem to be partially human. (Gygax &
 Arneson, 1983, p. 23)

 These basic editions of the game suggest a genetic determinism of what individuals can be and
their capacity to excel at various aspects of D&D gameplay. Extending this work to the “advanced”
versions of the game, in creating a character within D&D, one of the first choices a player makes is
the character’s race. The decision affects mechanics and, in the earlier editions of the game, limits
who and what an individual can become. Certain races are limited in how far they can advance
within the game. In the second edition, for example, when looking at the cleric class, gnomes are
restricted to reaching only the ninth level, halflings eighth, and elves 15th; humans are unlimited in
their potential. Perhaps a utopian perspective of human exceptionalism, these limitations fundamen-
tally highlight implicit assumptions about racial inferiority within the game.
 Adding to these perspectives of some races being better than others, all of the rulebooks have
highlighted how different races interact and view one another. In this first Players Handbook, Gygax
(1978) noted that
 there are also certain likes and dislikes which must be considered in selecting a racial type for your character.
 The dealings which a character has with various races will be affected by racial preferences to some extent.
 Similarly, the acquisition of hirelings by racial type might prove difficult for some characters if they go outside a
 narrow field. Your Dungeon Master will certain take racial preferences into account during interaction between
 your character and the various races which he or she will encounter. (p. 18)

 Racism is built into the D&D system. Early adventures published for D&D such as A1: Slave Pits
of the Undercity (Cook, 1980) focus on players freeing slaves and fighting oppressive forces; although
these adventures are set in a fictitious realm, racial differences drive evil intent and spark a tautology
of who is inherently good or evil.
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 241

 Across the editions of the game, race has meant a series of mechanical augmentations to a
character and preset attitudinal beliefs about other races within the world. These are fixed assump-
tions about distinct races built into the ideology of the gaming system. Even in the most recent
version of the game (Wizards of the Coast, 2014a), textual descriptions of races hint at bigotry and
oppression within the game’s history for different races. Half-orcs, for example, are described as
having powerful “savage attacks” (p. 41) that provide opportunities for extra damage in certain
situations. However, in playing such a character, participants also acknowledge that half-orcs have
been largely despised by others:

 Grudging Acceptance: Each half-orc finds a way to gain acceptance from those who hate orcs. Some are
 reserved, trying not to draw attention to themselves. A few demonstrate piety and good-heartedness as publicly
 as they can (whether or not such demonstrations are genuine). And some simply try to be so thought that
 others just avoid them. (Wizards of the Coast, 2014a, p. 41)

 Histories of war, slavery, and rape and pillage are implied within this text about “grudging
acceptance.” Although such text does not dictate if a character is good or evil, it implies the values
and beliefs that the world within this system imposes on individuals and what individuals impose on
one another.
 But what about “race” as we know it in today’s “real” world? Even acknowledging that there are not
cultural and ethnic differences among humans—let alone other fantasy races within the game—does not
show up until the later editions of the game. Prior to the fifth edition (Wizards of the Coast, 2014a),
most humans and demi-human images are White heroic characters. Building off the campaign setting
of the Forgotten Realms, the fifth edition Players Handbook explains, “The material culture and physical
characteristics of humans can change wildly from region to region” (p. 30). It continues,

 In the Forgotten Realms, nine human ethnic groups are widely recognized, though over a dozen others are
 found in more localized areas of Faerun. These groups and the typical names of their members, can be used as
 inspiration no matter which world your human is in. (p. 30)

 Detailing these different cultural groups, the book describes common physical traits such as
different hair, eye, and skin tones alongside culture differences and beliefs. Similarly, though this
study’s focus emphasizes articulations of race and gender within the core rulebooks for the various
editions of D&D, this study must also acknowledge the plethora of additional books and print-based
materials that expand the cultural and racial options for D&D players. As early as the 1975
Blackmoor supplement (Arneson, 1975) to the 1974 edition of D&D, players have built off of cultural
tropes of action films by introducing the “monk” class: martial artists largely inspired by kung fu
films of the era (Peterson, 2012). This class was expanded by the 1985 book Oriental Adventures
(Gygax, 1985). As the foreword to this volume makes clear, Oriental Adventures was developed from
a White “occidental” gaze: “This new book is aimed at providing players and Dungeon Masters with
the material they need to develop the ‘other half’ of their fantasy world” (p. 3). Trammell (2016)
noted that the success of Oriental Adventures could be inferred as based on the desires of a “racist
and sexist culture of American, Canadian, and British gamers.” Similarly, the opportunity to play the
other “other half” was provided with the 1992 release of Al-Qadim, a Middle Eastern expansion for
the game inspired by Western versions of One Thousand and One Nights (Grub, 1992). The game’s
ongoing depiction and enchantment with exoticized, non-Western cultures shaped the foundations
of D&D. Race is usually a physical concept that extends beyond simply endowing cultural identities
of human beings. However, it also usually reinforces Western notions of Whiteness and ongoing
fears of xenophobia. As both physical and cultural concepts within D&D, race and gender depictions
are not defined solely by the game’s author. Instead, players extend and build from the tools of
narrative construction they are provided in order to collaboratively extend problematic representa-
tions embedded within this system.
242 A. GARCIA

Dungeon masters and the dynamics of play and power
Gender and race are constructed through the narratives that players choose to tell within the game.
Choosing to be, within the virtual world of the D&D system, a male or female character, a dwarf or a
human—these are choices that hinge on players’ decisions. They do, as just demonstrated, result in
mechanical effects designed into the D&D rules system. However, unlike these player-facing choices,
constructions of player power and agency are beyond the choices individuals make at the table. The
actual rules of D&D dictate specific “repertoires of cultural practice” (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003).
 As D&D—and many RPGs that followed it—is a collaborative storytelling game, the individual
who facilitates and guides the stories being told is called the Dungeon Master (DM). Elsewhere, I
have written about how teachers can adopt the flexible practices of a DM in order to enrich their
classroom learning environments (Garcia, 2016). However, in the original descriptions of DMs, this
was a role that was much more prescriptive and punitive in its relationship with players than what is
described in the contemporary editions of D&D.
 The original editions of D&D refer to the DM as a “referee” and can be inferred as a rules
interpreter. As Peterson (2012) noted, the role of the referee was seen as an “arbiter” of rules and
permissibility within the wargaming circles from which D&D was created (p. 59). Unlike the
collaborative nature of how D&D is described and understood today, the game was originally one
in which DMs created and governed a virtual world and players were tasked as “organizers and
adventurers to order and explore it” (Gygax, 1978, p. 7).
 Players are guided to “cooperate with the Dungeon Master and respect his decisions. . . . Be
prepared to accept his decision as final and remember that not everything in the game will always go
your way!” (Gygax, 1978, p. 2). Further, earlier editions included additional rules of how players
must conduct themselves with the DM. For example, some editions of the game (Gygax, 1977; TSR,
1991) called for mappers and callers:
 The mapper is the player who draws a map of the dungeon as it is explored. One or more of the characters
 should be making maps, but one of the players must make the actual map.
 The caller is a player selected by the other players to describe part actions so the DM doesn’t have to listen to
 several voices at once. (Gygax, 1977 p. 5)

 Whereas all of the editions of D&D corroborate the fact that the DM “is the creative force behind
a D&D game” (Wizards of the Coast, 2014b, p. 4), the earlier versions of the game mechanically
reinforced subservience to this individual. Likewise, the DM often kept information hidden from her
or his players. The books of monsters like the Fiend Folio (Turnbull, 1981) include the various
creatures dwelling in the dungeons that players would encounter. To shield the content of books and
notes from players, as well as to occlude the die rolls they made, DMs often place a physical barrier
or screen between themselves and the players at their table. Likewise, the Dungeon Master’s Guide
(Gygax, 1979) reinforces this aura of secrecy suggesting that DMs “must view any non-DM player
possessing it as something less than worthy of honorable death” (p. 8).
 Again, like the conceptions of gender, the severity of description of this role has diminished
across the various editions of D&D. DM screens are still commonly used in gaming communities
and current Dungeon Master’s Guide (Wizards of the Coast, 2014b), and other DM-related material
(Laws, 2002; Vecchione, 2012) reinforce how DMs manage players. Issues of player control and
enthusiasm are common within these texts.

Discussion: Studying within and around cultural systems
Although the findings in this study can be read as damning of a potentially sexist and racist history
of a system that has shaped large swaths of contemporary geek culture, it is also a promising
reminder that like people, cultural constructions, and systems change. In looking at the description
of role-playing gamers in Gary Alan Fine’s (1983) formative ethnography of these communities in
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 243

the late 1970s and ’80s, his analysis rightly describes the fact that the vast majority of players at the
time were male wargaming enthusiasts (pp. 62–63). However, Fine’s assumptions about gender at
the time, although fitting in line with depictions of gender in the 1974, 1977, and 1989 editions of
D&D, are out of step with the contemporary instantiations of D&D (e.g., “Women as female
characters have little importance. Male players comment that female characters should be treated
as property and not as human beings”; Fine, 1983, p. 65). The systems of D&D Pathfinder and their
players are starkly different today.
 Further, the depictions of gender and race in the D&D system are not invented whole cloth
by Gygax and Arneson. As detailed in numerous accounts (Applecline, 2014a, 2014b, 2014c,
2014d; Ewalt, 2013; Peterson, 2012; Witwer, 2015), D&D was influenced by the tropes of
wargaming tabletop games, as well as by the pulp narratives of writers like Robert E.
Howard and H.P. Lovecraft. Assumptions of race and gender, then, can be traced further
back to the lineage of cultural production of a group of male writers publishing near the
turn of the 20th century. Gygax listed the authors who inspired his game design in the
appendix of the 1979 edition of the Dungeon Master’s Guide; unsurprisingly, the 30 authors
listed are all White and only three (Leigh Brackett, Andre Norton, and Margaret St. Clair) are
women (p. 224).
 Tracing the Matryoshka Doll–like nesting of cultural influence and production, it is important for
researchers in systems-driven environments to consider how culture constructs identities. Although
there is an abundance of insightful research into how games shape socialization and learning (in
both digital and nondigital contexts), such analyses cannot be studied as if games are isolated from
the cultures that influence them or in which they are embedded. This study’s findings reveal two
methodological stances to consider when looking at communities of gaming, schooling, and myriad
other learning contexts:

 (1) The cultural production and influence around a community must be explored. How
 individuals understand what happens within a gaming community, for example, is shaped
 and influenced by cultural factors external to the ecosystem being analyzed. In short, games
 are a part of culture, and culture seeps into their enactment.
 (2) The cultural production and influence from within the systemic design of cultural artifacts
 must be explored. As illustrated in this study, the human biases and beliefs of individuals
 that construct systems are embedded within systems. These guide beliefs and influence
 specific “cultural-historical repertoires” (Gutiérrez & Rogoff, 2003; p. 21).

 Although cultural-historical analyses often attend to the preceding first point, the human-built
foundations within systems may more easily be overlooked. Particularly as educational research
considers biases, oppression, and equity in varied communities of practice, the role that cultural
artifacts play in the shaping of meaning and understanding must be unpacked.
 In exploring tribalism in the online virtual world of World of Warcraft, Bergnall (2008) argued
that “stereotypes and cultural identities follow players into the game” (p. 119). Although the culture
around online gaming reinforces Bergnall’s claim, it is also worth recognizing that stereotypes and
prejudices don’t just flow into games: They are pushed out through systems’ designs. From a
cultural-historical perspective, we must consider that identity is “created from narratives that are
floating around” (Sfard & Prusak, 2005, p. 18).
 Finally, in looking at how human biases shape systems, which in turn shape players’ experiences,
the purposes of these systems must be reiterated. As a tool for creative, collaborative, and—ideally—
fun storytelling and play, D&D’s system must both guide and provide liberating opportunities for
innovation. Particularly considering that the noncanonical edition of D&D—Pathfinder (Paizo
Publishing, 2009)—seems to play a significant role in shifting embedded representations of gender,
this appears to be a significant moment to explore the possibilities of player communities extending
and reshaping systems. Further research is needed on how player communities are redefining who
244 A. GARCIA

games like D&D are for and what representation and identity in such games now looks like.
Acknowledging that game design means creating rules for others to play within and around,
Pearce and Artemesia (2009) questioned,
 How do you design for meaningful play when the play itself is unpredictable, essentially out of your control?
 The social fiction of virtual worlds can thus be viewed as a confluence of imagination: that of the designer and
 that of the players. (p. 31)

 D&D is a system of possibilities. Although these possibilities have been constricted in initial iterations,
the possibilities for revision, dialogue, and production have proven ripe in opening up and diversifying
what gaming and role-play mean and for whom. A critical understanding of how the foundational
aspects of the system have shaped current forms of play only further enriches these contexts.
 Although our constantly changing cultural interactions with systems like D&D create oppor-
tunities for these systems to change and improve over time, the flurry of death threats and
harassment from the gamergate movement that gaming critic Anita Sarkeesian received highlights
the ongoing vigilance needed around these systems (Wingfield, 2014). Sarkeesian’s experiences
reflect an additional layer of “cultural mediation” that is problematically “occurring over time”
(Cole, 1998, p. 292). In particular, this study should remind us that individuals’ agency can
function as a positive disruption to the stereotypes built into systems (Sfard & Prusak, 2005).
Although the initial language and images of D&D mean it is unsurprising that popular media—
from the Netflix hit Stranger Things to the television series Freaks and Geeks—largely depicts
primarily White male characters reenacting nostalgic sessions rolling dice with friends in the
1970s and ’80s, this is a landscape that can change. By focusing on what happens within and
around systems of cultural interaction, the possibilities for redefining systems and their commu-
nities become clearer.
 Like video games, the changes in language, design, and political orientation in D&D occur only
with the occasional release of new editions of the gaming system. It is a process that is arrested in its
development and perhaps has taken an inordinate amount of time to move beyond problematic
representations of race and gender.

Acknowledgments
I gratefully acknowledge the generous support of the National Academy of Education and the Spencer Foundation;
they provided resources and mentorship that were crucial for completing this article. I also thank Bonnie Nardi and
the two anonymous reviewers who helped me revise this work.

References
Anthropy, A. (2012). Rise of the videogame zinesters: How freaks, normals, amateurs, artists, dreamers, drop-outs,
 queers, housewives, and people like you are taking back an art form. New York, NY: Seven Stories Press.
Applecline, S. (2014a). Designers & dragons: A history of the roleplaying game industry ‘70-’79. Silver Spring, MD: Evil
 Hat Productions.
Applecline, S. (2014b). Designers & dragons: A history of the roleplaying game industry ‘80-’89. Silver Spring, MD: Evil
 Hat Productions.
Applecline, S. (2014c). Designers & dragons: A history of the roleplaying game industry ‘90-’99. Silver Spring, MD: Evil
 Hat Productions.
Applecline, S. (2014d). Designers & dragons: A history of the roleplaying game industry ‘00-’09. Silver Spring, MD: Evil
 Hat Productions.
Arneson, D. (1975). Dungeons & dragons supplement II: Blackmoor. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Rules.
Arneson, D., & Gygax, G. (1974). Dungeons & dragons. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR.
Bar-Yam, Y. (2005). Making things work: Solving complex problems in a complex world. Cambridge, MA: Knowledge
 Press.
Bergnall, T., III. (2008). Guild life in the World of Warcraft: Online gaming tribalism. In T. Adams & S. A. Smith
 (Eds.), Electronic tribes: The virtual worlds of geeks, gamers, shamans, and scammers (pp. 110–122). Austin:
 University of Texas Press.
 MIND, CULTURE, AND ACTIVITY 245

Boellstorff, T. (2008). Coming of age in Second Life: An anthropologist explores the virtually human. Princeton, NJ:
 Princeton University Press.
Boellstorff, T., Nardi, B., Pearce, C., & Taylor, T. L. (2012). Ethnography and virtual worlds: A handbook of method.
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Castells, M. (1996). The rise of the network society. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Chen, M. (2011). Leet noobs: The life and death of an expert player group in World of Warcraft. New York, NY: Peter
 Lang.
Coates, T. (2011). The unlikely influence of Dungeons & Dragons. The Atlantic. Retrieved from http://www.theatlan
 tic.com/personal/archive/2011/11/the-unlikely-influence-of-dungeons-dragons/248258/
Cole, M. (1998). Can cultural psychology help us think about diversity? Mind, Culture, and Activity, 5(4), 291–304.
 doi:10.1207/s15327884mca0504_4
Cole, M., Goncu, A., & Vadeboncoeur, J. A. (2015). Telling in time. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 22, 1–3. doi:10.1080/
 10749039.2014.990039
Cook, D. (1980). A1: Slave pits of the undercity. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR, Inc.
Cook, D. (1989). Player’s handbook. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Inc.
Daniels, J. (2009). Rethinking cyberfeminism: Race, gender and feminism in the digital era. Women’s Studies Quarterly,
 37(1–2), 101–124. doi:10.1353/wsq.0.0158
Daniels, J. (2013). Race, racism & internet studies: A review and critique. New Media & Society, 15(5), 695–719.
 doi:10.1177/1461444812462849
De La Peña, C. (2010). The history of technology, the resistance of archives, and the whiteness of race. Technology and
 Culture, 51(4), 919–937.
Dibbell, J. (1999). My tiny life: Crime and passion in a virtual world. New York, NY: Henry Holt.
Ewalt, D. M. (2013). Of dice and men: The story of Dungeons & Dragons and the people who play it. New York, NY:
 Scribner.
Fine, G. A. (1983). Shared fantasy: Role-playing games as social worlds. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Flanagan, M. (2009). Critical play: Radical game design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gall, J. (1977). Systemantics: How systems work and especially how they fail. New York, NY: Quadrangle.
Garcia, A. (2016). Teacher as dungeon master: Connected learning, democratic classrooms, and rolling for initiative.
 In A. Byers & F. Crocco (Eds.), The role-playing society: Essays on the cultural influence of RPGs (pp. 164–183). New
 York, NY: McFarland.
Grub, J. (1992). Al-qadim Arabian adventures. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Inc.
Gutiérrez, K. D., & Rogoff, B. (2003). Cultural ways of learning: Individual traits or repertoires of practice. Educational
 Researcher, 32(5), 19–25. doi:10.3102/0013189X032005019
Gygax, G. (1977). Monster manual. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Games.
Gygax, G. (1978). Players handbook. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Games.
Gygax, G. (1979). Dungeon masters guide. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Games.
Gygax, G. (1985). Oriental adventures. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Inc.
Gygax, G., & Arneson, D. (1977). Dungeons & dragons (E. Holmes, Ed.). Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Hobbies.
Gygax, G., & Arneson, D. (1983). Players manual (F. Mentzer, Ed.). Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Hobbies.
Gygax, G., & Perren, J. (1971). Chainmail: Rules for medieval miniatures. Evansville, IN: Guidon Games.
Harris, B. J. (2015). Console wars: Sega, Nintendo, and the battle that defined a generation. New York, NY:
 HarperCollins.
Hine, C. (2011). Virtual ethnography. New York, NY: Sage.
Huizinga, J. (1955). Homo ludens: A study of the play-element in culture. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Hurley, K. (2016). The geek feminist revolution. New York, NY: Tor Books.
ICv2. (2013). Top 5 RPGs—Summer 2013. ICv2. Retrieved from http://icv2.com/articles/games/view/27068/top-5-
 rpgs-summer-2013
Kushner, D. (2004). Masters of Doom: How two guys created an empire and transformed pop culture. New York, NY:
 Random House.
Laws, R. D. (2002). Robin’s laws of good game mastering. Austin, TX: Steve Jackson Games.
Laws, R. D. (2007). 40 years of Gen Con. Saint Paul, MN: Atlas Games.
Nardi, B. (2010). My life as a night elf priest: An anthropological account of World of Warcraft. Ann Arbor: University
 of Michigan Press.
O’Connor, K., Peck, F. A., & Cafarella, J. (2015). Struggling for legitimacy: Trajectories of membership and natur-
 alization in the sorting out of engineering students. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 22(2), 168–183. doi:10.1080/
 10749039.2015.1025146
Paizo Publishing. (2009). Pathfinder roleplaying game core rulebook. Redmond, WA: Author.
Pearce, C., & Artemesia. (2009). Communities of play: Emergent cultures in multiplayer games and virtual worlds.
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Peterson, J. (2012). Playing at the world: A history of simulating wars, people, and fantastic adventures from chess to
 role-playing games. San Diego, CA: Unreason Press.
246 A. GARCIA

Salen, K., & Zimmerman, E. (2004). Rules of play: Game design fundamentals. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Schnelbach, L. (2016). Dungeons and Dragons was “a revolution” for Junot Diaz. Tor. Retrieved from http://www.tor.
 com/2016/04/28/dungeons-and-dragons-was-a-revolution-for-junot-diaz/
Sfard, A., & Prusak, A. (2005). Telling identities. In search of an analytic tool for investigating learning as a culturally
 shaped activity. Educational Researcher, 34(4), 14–22. doi:10.3102/0013189X034004014
Shaw, A. (2014). Gaming at the edge: Sexuality and gender at the margins of gamer culture. Minneapolis: University of
 Minnesota Press.
Silver, D., & Massanari, A. (2006). Critical cyberculture studies. New York, NY: NYU Press.
Trammell, A. (2014). Misogyny and the female body in Dungeons and Dragons. Analog Game Studies, 1, 3.
Trammell, A. (2016). How Dungeons & Dragons appropriated the Orient. Analog Game Studies, 3, 1.
Turnbull, D. (Ed.). (1981). Fiend folio. Lake Geneva, WI: TSR Hobbies.
Vecchione, P. (2012). Never unprepared: The complete game master’s guide to session prep. Seattle, WA: Engine
 Publishing.
Vossoughi, S., Hooper, P. K., & Escude, M. (2016). Making through the lens of culture and power: Toward
 transformative visions for educational equity. Harvard Educational Review, 86(2), 206–232. doi:10.17763/0017-
 8055.86.2.206
Wingfield, N. (2014). Feminist critics of video games facing threats in ‘GamerGate’ campaign. The New York Times.
 Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/
Witwer, M. (2015). Empire of imagination: Gary Gygax and the birth of Dungeons & Dragons. New York, NY:
 Bloomsbury.
Wizards of the Coast. (2000). Player’s handbook. Renton, WA: Wizards of the Coast LLC.
Wizards of the Coast. (2014a). Player’s handbook. Renton, WA: Wizards of the Coast LLC.
Wizards of the Coast. (2014b). Dungeon master’s guide. Renton, WA: Wizards of the Coast LLC.
 Related Papers The Pictures Are So Much Better: Cross-Media Trends and Orality in Dungeons & Dragons By Nicholas J. Mizer “Byte-Sized Middle Ages: Tolkien, Film, and the Digital Imagination,” Comitatus 35 (2004): 145–74. By Courtney Booker Queering the Die By William C Riley Our Hero’s Quest: An Examination of the History and Influence of Role-playing Games By Matthew Price and Ethan Snyder “‘Scantily Clad and Well Proportioned’: Sexism and Gender Stereotyping in the Gaming Worlds of TSR and Dungeons & Dragons.” By Chris Danielson READ PAPER Download pdf 

 × Close Log In Log In  with  Facebook Log In  with  Google   Sign Up with Apple or Email: Password: Remember me on this computer or  reset password Enter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link.

 Need an account?  Click here to sign up 
 About Press Blog People Papers Job Board Advertise   We're Hiring!   Help Center Find new research papers in: Physics Chemistry Biology Health Sciences Ecology Earth Sciences Cognitive Science Mathematics Computer Science Terms Privacy Copyright Academia ©2020 

