 

 Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games: Mind, Culture, and Activity: Vol 24, No 3 

 Skip to Main Content 

 Log in

  |  

 Register

 Cart 

 Home

 All Journals

 Mind, Culture, and Activity

 List of Issues

 Volume 24, Issue 3

 Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons .... 

 Search in: 

 This Journal

 Anywhere

 Advanced search 

 Mind, Culture, and Activity

 Volume 24, 2017 - Issue 3 

 Submit an article 

 Journal homepage 

 9,986

 Views

 28

 CrossRef citations to date

 0 

 Altmetric

 Articles Privilege, Power, and Dungeons & Dragons: How Systems Shape Racial and Gender Identities in Tabletop Role-Playing Games Antero Garcia Stanford University Correspondence antero.garcia@stanford.edu 

 Pages 232-246 
 |
 Published online: 07 Apr 2017 

 Cite this article 

 https://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2017.1293691 

 CrossMark 

 Full Article 

 Figures & data 

 References 

 Citations 

 Metrics 

 Reprints & Permissions 

 Read this article

 /doi/full/10.1080/10749039.2017.1293691?needAccess=true

 ABSTRACT This article takes a cultural-historical approach to analyzing how systems shape the assumptions, identities, and experiences of their users. Focusing on how the tabletop role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons is built on a system of play that has grown and shifted over the course of 40 years, this study emphasizes the central role that systems play in mediating the experiences of participants. By focusing on depictions of gender, race, and power in Dungeons & Dragons—as a singular cultural practice—this study highlights how researchers must attend to cultural production both around and within systems. 

 Acknowledgments I gratefully acknowledge the generous support of the National Academy of Education and the Spencer Foundation; they provided resources and mentorship that were crucial for completing this article. I also thank Bonnie Nardi and the two anonymous reviewers who helped me revise this work. 

 Reprints and Corporate Permissions 

 Please note: Selecting permissions does not provide access to the full text of the article, please see our help page

 How do I view content? 

 To request a reprint or corporate permissions for this article, please click on the relevant link below: 

Order Reprints

 --> 
Request Corporate Permissions

 Academic Permissions 

 Please note: Selecting permissions does not provide access to the full text of the article, please see our help page How do I view content? 

Obtain permissions instantly via Rightslink by clicking on the button below:

 Request Academic Permissions 

If you are unable to obtain permissions via Rightslink, please complete and submit this Permissions form . For more information, please visit our Permissions help page .

 Share icon 

 Related research 

 People also read lists articles that other readers of this article have read. 
 Recommended articles lists articles that we recommend and is powered by our AI driven recommendation engine. 
 Cited by lists all citing articles based on Crossref citations. Articles with the Crossref icon will open in a new tab. 

 People also read 

 Recommended articles 

 Cited by 

 Browse journals by subject 

 Back to top 

 Area Studies 

 Arts 

 Behavioral Sciences 

 Bioscience 

 Built Environment 

 Communication Studies 

 Computer Science 

 Earth Sciences 

 Economics, Finance, Business & Industry 

 Education 

 Engineering & Technology 

 Environment & Agriculture 

 Environment and Sustainability 

 Food Science & Technology 

 Geography 

 Global Development 

 Health and Social Care 

 Humanities 

 Information Science 

 Language & Literature 

 Law 

 Mathematics & Statistics 

 Medicine, Dentistry, Nursing & Allied Health 

 Museum and Heritage Studies 

 Physical Sciences 

 Politics & International Relations 

 Social Sciences 

 Sports and Leisure 

 Tourism, Hospitality and Events 

 Urban Studies 

 Information for 

 Authors 
 R&D professionals 
 Editors 
 Librarians 
 Societies 

 Open access 

 Overview 
 Open journals 
 Open Select 
 Dove Medical Press 
 F1000Research 

 Opportunities 

 Reprints and e-prints 
 Advertising solutions 
 Accelerated publication 
 Corporate access solutions 

 Help and information 

 Help and contact 
 Newsroom 
 All journals 
 Books 

 Keep up to date 

 Register to receive personalised research and resources by email 

 Sign me up 

 Taylor and Francis Group Facebook page 

 Taylor and Francis Group X Twitter page 

 Taylor and Francis Group Linkedin page 

 Taylor and Francis Group Youtube page 

 Taylor and Francis Group Weibo page 

 Copyright © 2023 Informa UK Limited 
 Privacy policy 
 Cookies 
 Terms & conditions 
 Accessibility 

 Registered in England & Wales No. 3099067 
5 Howick Place | London | SW1P 1WG 

 Your download is now in progress and you may close this window 
 Did you know that with a free Taylor & Francis Online account you can gain access to the following benefits? 

 Choose new content alerts to be informed about new research of interest to you 
 Easy remote access to your institution's subscriptions on any device, from any location 
 Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results 
 Export your search results into a .csv file to support your research 

 Have an account? 
 Login now 

 Don't have an account? 
 Register for free 

 Login or register to access this feature 

 Have an account? 
 Login now 

 Don't have an account? 
 Register for free 

 Register a free Taylor & Francis Online account today to boost your research and gain these benefits: 

 Choose new content alerts to be informed about new research of interest to you 
 Easy remote access to your institution's subscriptions on any device, from any location 
 Save your searches and schedule alerts to send you new results 
 Export your search results into a .csv file to support your research 

 Register 
 now or learn more 

