When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

Fantasy literature frequently relies on mythological narratives and
includes within its plots elements of various religions, transforming their
structural patterns, motifs and symbolism — e.g. the fight between good
and evil, the quest, the rites of passage, the figure of a saviour whose
sacrifice saves the world, etc. Consequently, it creates not only secondary
worlds, but also secondary religions, and even secondary spheres of sacrum.
Applying the tools of the phenomenology of religion to these texts uncov-
ers both religious and mythological references and reveals the spiritual
message of the books*. The approach has been successfully demonstrated
with reference to The Fionavar Tapestry by Weronika Laszkiewicz (2014:
183-188), who identifies various elements connected with Christianity,
Norse and Celtic mythologies, Taoism, beliefs in reincarnation, and even
shamanistic rituals as the basis of Fionavar’s multifaceted sacrum, which
indeed impresses the reader with its sheer scale. The problem, however, is
that the method appears less productive when applied to Kay’s subsequent
novels, where he diverts from the model of the “patchwork” creation
of complicated religious systems themselves and seriously reduces the
importance of magic and supernatural elements, offering instead a more
general reflection on the uses and abuses of religious principles.

In fact, like much of his fiction, The Lions of Al-Rassan and The Sar-
antine Mosaic highlight the connection between violence and religious
ideology, tempting one to see Kay’s novels as a manifestation of the
gloomy view that religions originate and perpetuate violent behaviours and

4 Such an approach is exemplified by Jolanta Leba’s (2010) study on religious ideas in
fantasy literature covering the period 1930-1975 and focusing on the works of such
authors as Robert Howard, Fritz Leiber, Ursula K. Le Guin, Andre Norton, C.S Lewis
and J.R.R. Tolkien. Leba proposes to compare the themes of literary texts with reli-
gious notions present in various cultural contexts in order to unmask religious ideas
that remain hidden, degraded and transformed by the authors of fantasy narratives.
Her analysis centers on the relationship between magic and religion, the portrayal of
wizards and their connections with power, the construction of characters and their
moral attitudes, and other mythological and religious motifs. Leba’s major argument
is that fantasy literature is a literary manifestation of a human need to find and recon-
nect with sacrum, as it draws the reader’s attention to the sphere of non-material,
spiritual reality.

219
