Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun

bloodshed. Such a link has been observed, for instance, by Leo D. Lefebure,
who writes in Revelation, the Religions, and Violence:

the brutal facts of the history of religions impose the stark realiza-
tion of the intertwining of religion and violence: violence, clothed
in religious garb, has repeatedly cast a spell over religion and cul-
ture, luring countless ‘decent’ people — from unlettered peasants
to learned priests, preachers, and professors — into its destructive
dance. (Lefebure 2000: 13)

While it would be difficult to deny the fact that religions and violence might
indeed go together, Lefebure’s statement provides more questions than
answers. Is there something inherent to religions that makes them more
prone to violence than other ideologies and practices? Do they inspire
followers to commit violence or are they used to justify acts of barbarity
caused by something else? If so, for what reasons? Finally, what exactly
is it that lures “decent” people, irrespective of their social standing, into
religion-related violence? And if they are lured into it, do they actually
remain “decent”?

Kay’s novels invite readers to ponder these questions by depicting
religions as social and political constructs created by humans rather than
gods, who are generally absent from the narratives and do not interfere in
the holy wars fought in their names. Furthermore, the religious conflicts,
as depicted by the Canadian author, cannot be easily interpreted as the
eternal fight between the forces of good and evil, as none of the sides can
claim superior moral standards. This stems from Kay’s decision to favour
historical sources over mythological ones, and has interesting implications
for the construction of his characters. If no side is destined to win by gods’
favour, if there is neither a typical saviour figure nor an eternal enemy,
if the outcome of events is the result of changing circumstances rather
than prophecy, the actions performed by the protagonists are not prede-
termined but result from their personal motivations and moral choices
made while the wheel of history — not fortune — is mercilessly moving.
Consequently, their decisions are not always obvious, and righteousness
and virtue are not automatically connected with any of the religions.

220
