When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

The plot of The Lions of Al-Rassan focuses on the conflict of three
monotheistic religions and encapsulates the long history of the re-conquest
of the Iberian Peninsula into the life span of three protagonists, entangled
in a love triangle that is further complicated by the fact that each of them
follows a different religion. Jehane bet Ishak is a female Kindath physi-
cian; Rodrigo Belmonte — a Jaddite cavalry commander; and Ammar ibn
Khairan, an Asharite poet, diplomat, soldier, and assassin‘. As for religions,
Asharites, the descendants of the tribesmen of the desert, worship the
stars; Jaddites — the sun; and Kindath — the two sister moons. Apart from
this, little is known about their gods but just enough about their cultural
practices to roughly associate these religions with Islam, Christianity and
Judaism, respectively. For instance, Asharites are supposed to refrain from
drinking alcohol, dancing, and non-religious music, but are great patrons
of art and poetry, whereas Jaddites frequently make the sign of the sun-disk,
kneel and pray in chapels, and wage a campaign to reconquer lands from
the Asharite caliphate. Kindath, in turn, are depicted as eternal wanderers,
usually merchants or medical practitioners, forbidden by both Asharite
and Jaddite laws to own land or ride horses, and expected to live in re-
stricted parts of the cities, which are occasionally destroyed and burnt in
pogroms. While Asharites and Jaddites, holding real political power, fight
for dominance over the Peninsula, the Kindath, branded as inferior, he-
retical, and even monstrous — one Jaddite saint refers to them as “animals
[...] to be hunted down and burned from the face of the Earth” (105) — are
persecuted by both. And yet, like in medieval Al-Andalus, the three popu-
lations have managed to co-exist for centuries in fictional Al-Rassan, even
though their relationships are characterized by mutual distrust, resulting

> Although examining the influences that lay behind the construction of these charac-
ters lies beyond the scope of this article, it is worth noting that the figure of Rodrigo
Belmonte is loosely based on the Spanish medieval hero El Cid, a historical person
and protagonist of the twelfth-century epic poem The Poem of the Cid (El Cantar de
mio Cid), which connection is duly observed by Holly E, Ordway. Ammar ibn Khairan,
as his name suggests, might have been partly inspired by Ibn Ammar — a Muslim poet
living in the Iberian Peninsula in 1031-1086, yet more research is needed to support
this point.

221
