Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun

from insufficient knowledge of one another, false beliefs, and superstitions,
which are envenomed by religious leaders and used by political rulers to
clothe territorial and economic expansion as holy war.

Kay emphasizes the economic and political motivations for the war
over and over again, implying perhaps that the concept of “holy” or re-
ligious war is a misleading one. To put it briefly, religions as such do not
produce wars, as it is not possible to separate them from wider political,
economic and social contexts. In The Myth of Religious Violence, William
T. Cavanaugh (2009) argues that while it is impossible to disconnect re-
ligious violence from secular violence, this division has been established
in contemporary Western thought to present secular aggression as more
rational, and therefore better sanctioned than that connected with re-
ligions. The problem with this “myth” is that “there is no such thing as
a transhistorical or transcultural “religion” that is essentially separate from
politics. Religion has a history, and what counts as religion and what does
not in any given context depends on different configurations of power
and authority” (Cavanaugh 2009: 9). This is not to say that ideologies and
practices of all kinds (including religious ones) cannot and do not promote
violence under certain circumstances, yet religions are not automatically
more prone to violence than other ideologies.

When the religious teachings of the three religions in The Lions of
Al-Rassan are taken out of cultural context and compared, they appear
strikingly similar:

Asharite — “The deeds of men, as footprints in the desert” (109);
Kindath - “Nothing under the circling moon is fated to last”

(109);
Jaddite — “Even the sun goes down” (110).

All three of them strongly emphasize the transitory nature of things,
in a way foreshadowing the inevitability of the war that would end a certain
historical and cultural stage as well as radically affect the lives of individu-
als. Nevertheless, the war is not a direct result of religious teachings, but
of a combination of many other factors. The Asharite caliphate, a place

222
