When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

where learning and culture reached their peak, is weakened by internal

conflicts; the bordering Jaddite kingdoms with their warrior culture are

regaining their strength and have produced a leader with a vision for expan-
sion; and, finally, the crusade against Asharite overseas lands, inspired and

sanctioned by the highest Jaddite authorities, creates the right atmosphere

for the reconquest of Al-Rassan. The trouble is not with religions and their
spiritual messages as such, but with their interpretation, and even more

with connecting secular power with religious ideology — a mixture that
becomes deadly in these particular historical circumstances.

While the The Lions of Al-Rassan focuses on the perilous effects of
combining religious and secular power, The Sarantine Mosaic, “a fantasy
on the themes of Byzantium”’, as Kay himself refers to it in Acknow-
ledgements to Sailing to Sarantium, centers on the theme of iconoclasm,
or “iconomachy’, the term the Byzantines themselves would have used
to refer to the “image struggle’, as Brubaker (2012: 4) rightly notes. Fur-
thermore, it provides a comment on the mechanisms of including and
excluding the elements of various cults from the official dogma, showing
how closely they are linked with politics. Here we see the Jaddite religion
in a much earlier phase of its development, when the doctrine it is not
fully fixed, but caught in the process of becoming, which is more often
violent than peaceful:

Divisions of faith in the worship of Jad had led to burnings and
torture and war almost from the beginning. [...] The god was in the
sun, or he was behind the sun. The world had been born in light, or
it had been released from ice and darkness by holy light. At one time
the god was thought to die in winter and be reborn in the spring,
but the gentle cleric who had expounded this had been ordered

© In “Justinian Visited and Revisited’, an article from the French academic journal Ana-
bases 5 (2007), translated into English and available on Kay’s authorized website, Pierre-
Louis Malosse observes that in The Sarantine Mosaic “the debt to the real sixth-century
Byzantium is not at all disguised’, and illustrates his claim with examples of a number
of real people and places featuring in the novels under new, often transparent names
(Rhodia — Rome, Varena — Ravenna, Trakesia — Thrace, Valerius I — Justinian I, etc.).

223
