Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun

torn apart between cayalry horses by a High Patriarch in Rhodias.
(Sailing to Sarantium, ch. 5)

Still, the most important controversy in Sarantium concerns Heladikos,
depicted as the Charioteer, who sacrificed his life to bring fire to the

people. Being a combination of Helios, Prometheus, and Jesus Christ,
at different points in history he was revered as Jad’s mortal son, at other

times as a half-mortal one, or even as a deity himself. Although at the time

when the action is set he is ruled out from the official dogma altogether,
Kay emphasizes that Emperors and Patriarchs frequently changed their

position, and “Heladikos the Charioteer moved in and out of acceptance

and fashion, much as the sun moved in and out of cloud on a windy day”
(Sailing to Sarantium, ch. 5), in this way pinpointing the arbitrariness of
deciding on what is accepted as an official doctrine and what is excluded
from it.

However, whatever Emperors, and Patriarchs decree is not as eagerly
accepted by ordinary people, who have continued to find the saviour
figure, sacrificing his own life for the sake of humanity, exceptionally at-
tractive. The debate on Heladikos unofficially continues in all corners of
the empire and in the streets of the city of Sarantium itself, even though
it has been formally declared a heresy’. In the world of The Sarantine
Mosaic, various heresies and utterly pagan beliefs lurk behind canonical
dogma, the establishment of which is intertwined with political and court
intrigues in a never-ending struggle for authority. Religious fanatics are
also juxtaposed with the fanatic supporters of chariot race factions, whose
worship of the finest charioteers can be seen as a secular cult, and both
groups are actually prone to violence and manipulation.

With the main theme centered around Caius Crispus, a mosaicist,
summoned to Sarantium from Rhodia to create the mosaic on the dome

7 Interestingly, by the time in which Lions of Al-Rassan is set, i.e. a couple of centuries
later, the problematic deity has disappeared from Jaddite teachings altogether. Jaddite
religion in this novel is unified and much more institutionalized, but has also lost
much of its earlier mysticism.

224
