When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

of the Great Sanctuary, the clash over the visual representation of Jad
is only one aspect of the religious controversies depicted in the novel.
Crispin’s magnificent vision of the dome, and his aim to represent the
entirety of creation, which entails orthodox, heretical, and even pagan
beliefs, the world of the living and the dead, nature and culture, is never
completed; and what has actually been created is to be demolished piece
by piece, as in the meantime, together with the bloody change of the rul-
ers®, the views on the visual representation of God change as well. The
new iconoclastic emperor holds that it is “not proper for the pious to
render or worship images of the god or show mortal figures in a holy place”
(Lord of Emperors, ch. 15). Again, Kay shows religious issues against a vast
social and political context, presenting them as elements of a continu-
ously changing mosaic, each of them influencing one another, the whole
configuration shifting when even one of the components is purposefully
or incidentally altered. This is reinforced by the narrative technique,
which features multiple plots and focalizers, ranging from aristocrats
and senators, through merchants and craftsmen, to charioteers, soldiers,
servants and even foreigners, who perceive the Sarantine empire from the
outside. These multiple perspectives challenge any attempts to produce
a unified and organized reality, or a coherent and structured view of the
world, which would be stable and unchanging (Majkowski 2013: 316-8).
One of the unexpected developments appears towards the end of the
duology, when it is implied that even if some stability is finally achieved
within the Sarantine Empire, it is not to be permanent, as a new religion
that would complicate the picture is being born somewhere on the mar-
gins of its territories, in the desert, “where a man in a hood, with a cloak
drawn over his mouth, preserved a silence among the drifting sands, hav-
ing remained awake all the night before, fasting, and looking up at the
stars” (Lord of Emperors, ch. 15). The reference establishes the Asharite

8 Once more, for the sake of plot coherence and dramatic effect Kay plays with chrono-
logical accuracy, squeezing the debate on the role of religious images that preoccupied
Byzantium from the 720s to the middle of the ninth century (Mango 1975: 1, Brubaker
2012: 4-5) within the span of his narrative.

225
