Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun

religion as stemming from the epiphany of its first leader; yet, as The
Lions of Al-Rassan demonstrates, with time it will be transformed into
a codified system of beliefs and practices, the adherence to which will be
of more importance than spiritual experience.

Religion in Kay’s fiction is inseparable from history, and the two con-
stantly influence each other. At the same time Kay’s fiction avoids favouring
one religious system over others, and refuses to evaluate them in terms of
moral and spiritual truth, signalling that devotion to a given religious code
does not automatically signify righteousness and virtue. This becomes
particularly apparent in The Lions of Al-Rassan, where religion is politicized
to a greater extent and cynically used as an excuse for war. The question

“What shall good men do in such a war?” is answered simply “Kill each
other, until something ends in the world” (430). Even if the protagonists
are able to cooperate and form bonds of love and friendship that prove
stronger than cultural and religious differences, their individual victory
proves insufficient to stop the wheel of history, powered by political, eco-
nomic and religious fuel, once it starts rolling. As Tomasz Z. Majkowski
(2013: 315) succinctly puts it, The Lions of Al-Rassan is a “novel about
the people who can communicate perfectly well when taken out of their
cultural context but have to kill each other when they come back to it”
In The Sarantine Mosaic, the mosaic of history and religion is created
only by the few who arbitrarily include or exclude certain elements from
their vision, with ordinary people being barely, if at all, aware that history-
changing events are taking place. The vision of all-encompassing religion,
symbolized by Crispin’s artistic vision, is a mirage or a dream doomed
to fail; yet the protagonist manages to find peace and happiness once he
consciously withdraws from the central stage of history and renounces
any attempts to change it. While the protagonists in none of the novels
can actually significantly influence the course of history, which is indeed
unstoppable, they do have command over their decisions and moral
choices, which frequently demand some sacrifice and have an impact on
the lives of those who are closest to them.

As we have seen, in both works religion constitutes an important ele-
ment of the game for power, but how does it relate to individual belief,

226
