When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

the worship of God, and the sphere of the sacred? As Laba notes, sacrum
in fantasy novels is linked with magic/power, which is not only a basic
constituent element of the genre, but also stems from the conviction that
“parallelly to the material world, there exists a powerful spiritual reality that
significantly influences the fate of the protagonist” (41). If the sphere of the
sacred is strongly linked with the supernatural and fantastic elements in
fantasy, then Kay’s narratives, in which the fantastic habitually gives way
to the mimetic mode of representation, seem to devote little attention to
it. While much effort is taken to outline the social and cultural context,
as well as to provide psychological credibility of the characters, who are
much more rounded than the plot demands, the fantastic remains quite
vague, signalled rather than fully outlined, and, I believe, there is a reason
for that. What Kay’s novels seem to imply is that sacrum is much more
elusive and difficult to grasp, whereas religions provide only an imperfect
substitute for spiritual experience.

In the The Lions of Al-Rassan, the only significant manifestation of
the fantastic is the figure of the child-seer, the son of Rodrigo Belmonte,
whose gift of predicting the future of his nearest and dearest is identified
as both a blessing and a curse, impossible to control and unpredictable.
Diego Belmonte may be referred to as “blessed by Jad” (112), but it is
emphasized that under other circumstances people like him “had been
burned, or nailed alive to wooden beams as sorcerers” (112). An attempt
to use his powers in the campaign against the Asharites ends disastrously,
as Diego is seriously wounded in the head by an enemy. Ironically, “a boy
touched by god” (112) cannot be used as a tool in a religious war, which
illustrates the premise that there is nothing “holy” about the whole cam-
paign. Interestingly, the Jaddite boy survives thanks to a risky surgery
performed by Jehane’s father, a Kindath doctor once famous, but blinded
years ago for seeing an Asharite wife of the caliph naked while saving
her life in a complicated labour. The physician appears on the scene
only because he has just been rescued from the pogrom by Diego's fa-
ther, Rodrigo Belmonte, and Ammar ibn Khairan, whose knowledge
of Asharite military plans allowed all of them to get there in time. The
scene features an almost miraculous coincidence, yet the miracle is not

227
