Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun

a result of divine intervention, but of the cooperation of the characters,
who willfully disregard religious differences in favour of bonds of love
and friendship. Holly Ordway (1998) reads the scene as hinting “at the
possibility of peaceful interaction among the three embattled religious
groups”, but it seems such a collaboration is possible only when the
demands of three institutionalized religions are ignored, a condition
impossible to fulfill in the world of Al-Rassan. Paradoxically, Rodrigo,
Ammar and Jehanne, renouncing the cultural practices that have ac-
cumulated around their respective religious systems, truly adhere to
the original teachings by always choosing to act decently irrespective
of either external circumstances or personal desires, and accepting the
consequences of their actions.

In The Sarantine Mosaic, showing religious principles in the process of
becoming, the fantastic features more prominently, although it is officially
banned from the doctrine. The citizens of Sarantium have no problem
combining the beliefs in Jad and his Holy Church with those in ghosts, de-
mons and curse-tablets, which makes the otherworld a part of their reality.
There is also the pagan ars magica of the alchemist Zoticus, which does
not appear particularly spectacular — “No half-world-spawned fireballs
or death spells. No walking through walls or flying over them, invisible.
Merely fabricated birds with... souls and voices” (Sailing to Sarantium,
ch. 2). Later, however, it becomes clear that the alchemist’s art involved
“stealing” the souls of women, killed as sacrificial offering to the old god,
and transmuting them into wooden birds. Although the act itself does not
produce spectacular effects, and his magic is not particularly important
for the development of the narrative, it demonstrates that there exists
another dimension of reality, which can neither be fully explained nor
controlled. Finally, there is the zubir, the ancient spirit of the forest, or
nature itself, the primeval oak god, the embodiment of a mythical god
from the times before religions, encountered by Crispin in the forest
on his way to Sarantium. The experience evokes a profound emotional
response and is described in detail:

9 http://brightweavings.com/ggk/worldbuilding/ (accessed: 25 August 2016).

228
