When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

Terror consumed him, asserting mastery, dominance, as he fol-
lowed the girl and the stupefying creature that was [...] more than
he could grasp. A god? The showing forth of one? The numinous?
[...] The bison was enormous, impossibly so, taller than Crispin was,
wide as a house, the great, horned head vast and appalling. And
yet, as they entered the woods, the first black trees like sentinels,
wet leaves falling about them and upon them, the creature moved
lightly, gracefully, never turning after that first look back — certain
they were following. (Sailing to Sarantium, ch. 4)

The zubir demands a sacrifice, but Crispin and his companions are spared;
what the beast really wants is Zoticus’s mechanical bird, whose soul was
stolen from the god years ago and now must be returned to complete the
interrupted sacrificial offering.

Mysterious and awe-inspiring, fascinating and commanding absolute
submission, the zubir can be seen as the representation of the numinous,
understood as divine force that transcends the categories of history, culture
and religion, something that can only be experienced, not defined (Otto
1923: 12-13). The encounter proves formative, changes Crispin’s percep-
tion of reality, and leaves him with an understanding of God that goes
beyond the teachings of Jad’s Church. When asked how to worship Jad
and his son after such an experience, he reflects:

‘We worship them as the powers that speak to our souls, if it seems

they do.’ He surprised himself. “We do so knowing there is more

to the world, and the half-world, and perhaps worlds beyond, than

we can grasp. We always knew that. We can’t even stop children from

dying, how would we presume to understand the truth of things?

Behind things? Does the presence of one power deny another? (Sail-
ing to Sarantium, ch. 4)

In contrast to The Lions of Al-Rassan, which diminishes the sphere of the
sacred, The Sarantine Mosaic presents it as something that is not limited
to particular religions, but extends beyond their doctrines. Unlike religious
ideologies that are always context-bound, sacrum is truly transcultural
and transhistorical. While it cannot be precisely delineated or explained,

229
