Sylwia Borowska-Szerszun

it is also uniquely immune to being manipulated, used, or abused, and
as such does not partake in writing historical narratives. While deep
spiritual experience plays no significant part in the course of history, it
may have a tremendous effect on individual life, which is reflected in
Crispin’s artistic vision, and further demonstrated by his gradual accept-
ance of the death of his wife and daughters, which has haunted him for
the major part of the story. Accepting the weight of both historical and
personal past makes him finally ready to move on.

The paradox inherent to Kay’s fiction is that he is both faithful and
unfaithful to his historic sources. Although, his novels are grounded in
meticulous research, he manipulates the material in terms of chrono-
logical accuracy, squeezing or extending the periods of events, includ-
ing, excluding and reinterpreting historical facts to make his narratives
coherent and emotionally involving. While each and every one of them
sends us back to real events, detailed knowledge of these events is not
crucial to understand the historiosophical problem chosen as the central
theme. And the same is true of his treatment of religions. Kay is not really
interested in creating dogmas or believable religious systems with fully
developed cosmologies and myths. These are in fact quite vague, as the
emphasis is placed on uncovering the mechanisms that make religion
a tool of politics, or politics a tool of religion. The clashes motivated by
conflicting religious ideologies and the un-holy economic wars fought
in the names of fictitious gods are staged as central to the development
of action and draw our attention to the role of an individual entangled in
the process of historical change.

Deliberately exposing the fictionality of his fantasy of history, which
in The Sarantine Mosaic is purposefully highlighted by the figure of
a historian manipulating the facts to create his own version of histori-
cal events, Kay seems to question the validity of historical narratives as
such, suggesting that perhaps they are not more “truthful” than literature
is. Similarly, fictionalising religious ideologies removes them from the
familiar and pre-conceived perspectives of Judaism, Christianity and Is-
Jam, which in turn encourages the readers to reflect upon religion and its
mechanisms in a more universal context. While this reflection does not

230
