When Gods are Absent from Fantasy...

offer much hope or consolation, Kay presents a more optimistic view on
individual spirituality and sense of morality that do not need to be con-
nected with a particular religious system, yet lie at the root of the choices
made by the protagonists of his novels, whose humanity remains intact,
even when the forces of history press them to take an uneasy path. Even
though Kay “rejects the idea that human beings can ever by their own
rational ingenuity escape subjection to the weight of their personal and
cultural pasts”, as observed by Christopher Cobb, the bitter-sweet — not
eucatastrophic — conclusions of the novels foreground the message that
it is possible to remain “decent” and come to terms with the burden of
not only the political and cultural past, but also personal memory.

Bibliography

Brubaker, Leslie. Inventing Byzantine Iconoclasm. London: Bristol Classical Press, 2012.

Cavanaugh, William T. The Myth of Religious Violence. Secular Ideology and the
Roots of Modern Conflict. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.

Cobb, Christopher. “Guy Gavriel Kay and the Psychology of History”. Bright Weav-
ings. http://brightweavings.com/ggk/hspsychologyhistory/ (accessed: 20 No-
vember 2016).

Kay, Guy Gavriel. “Home and Away”. Bright Weavings. http://brightweavings.com/
ggk/globe/ (accessed: 10 September 2016).

Kay, Guy Gavriel. The Lions of Al-Rassan. London: Earthlight, 2002.

Kay, Guy Gavriel. Sailing to Sarantiurn: Book One of The Sarantine Mosaic. Kindle
edition. New York: ROC Books, 2010.

Kay, Guy Gavriel. Lord of Emperors. Book Two of The Sarantine Mosaic. Kindle
edition. New York: ROC Books, 2010.

Lefebure, Leo D. Revelation, the Religions, and Violence. Maryknoll, NY: Orbis, 2000.

Laba, Jolanta. Idee religijne w literaturze fantasy. Studium fenomenologiczne. Gdatisk:
Gdariski Klub Fantastyki, 2010.

Laszkiewicz, Weronika. “Phenomenology of Religion and the Study of Modern
Fantasy Literature”. Acta Neophilologica XVI. 1/2014, 180-189.

+0 http://brightweavings.com/ggk/hspsychologyhistory/ (accessed: 20 November 2016).

231
