Editor's Desk: The Future of Dealing with AI Submissions by Neil Clarke : Clarkesworld Magazine – Science Fiction & Fantasy 

 Skip to content 

 C larkesworl D 

 SCIENCE FICTION & FANTASY MAGAZINE

 ☰

 MENU

 About Us 

 Subscribe 

 Back Issues 

 Cover Gallery 

 Podcast 

 Submissions 

 Mailing List 

 Support Us 

 Advertising 

 × 
 ABOUT US 
 SUBSCRIBE 
 BACK ISSUES 
 COVER GALLERY 
 PODCAST 
 SUBMISSIONS 
 MAILING LIST 
 SUPPORT US 
 ADVERTISING 

 BROWSE BY

 FICTION 
 AUDIO FICTION 
 ARTICLES 
 INTERVIEWS 
 AWARDS & RECOGNITION 
 AUTHORS & ARTISTS 

 EXPLORE

 RANDOM STORY 
 RANDOM PODCAST 

 SEARCH

 Search for: 

 FOLLOW US ON

 Issue 227 – August 2025 

 Editorial

 Editor's Desk: The Future of Dealing with AI Submissions

 by Neil Clarke 

 While I was at Readercon last month, an author asked me how things were going with our attempts to keep “AI” out of the slush pile. It seems like almost no time has passed since I posted an update, but when you are in the thick of things, a sense of time is among the first things to go. In short, it remains a serious problem, the patterns have changed, and we may have to as well. If that’s all you wanted to know, you can stop here and go read some more stories.

 The good news is that the adaptations we made to our submissions process (documented at neil-clarke.com ) are still functioning well enough that we haven’t had to close submissions since that initial surge. At its peak, our submissions more than doubled due to the high volume of generated works. Back then, the primary driving force behind those submissions was the side-hustle con-artist communities on YouTube, TikTok, and other venues. They routinely told their audiences that they could generate stories and make easy money by submitting them to people like us, or in several cases, us specifically. While these scams continue to drive traffic, they have stopped growing and have become more erratic/spikey in nature. We can always tell when someone makes a new video and sadly, we’ve been unable to get any of the hosting platforms to take action. It’s likely this type of nonsense will continue in some capacity for the foreseeable future.

 If that was the extent of our problems, I’d be happy. Those patterns are predictable and easier to catch. The bad news is that a second group of “AI” users has stepped up to fill a growing portion of that void. These people more closely resemble the patterns of our traditional submitting authors, which means they are more likely to bypass our filter and avoid our attempts to deprioritize generated works in the pool.

 In many cases, these works have been “co-written” with “AI” or simply given a polishing edit in an attempt to make them less obvious. While these are more sophisticated attempts to get generated works past us, they still display the hallmarks I’ve come to expect, and occasionally, they even leave a prompt or ChatGPT response in the text. Given that I’ve seen some flash and poetry examples of these works find publication elsewhere (the tells are more obvious on longer works), I’d have to rate it as slightly more complicated to recognize. This is one of the few instances I’ll admit that there were some advantages to the flood we received.

 As this group grows, and it is growing , it jeopardizes our ability to properly prioritize human writing and maintain open submissions. That’s unacceptable to me.

 I was already thinking ahead to this scenario when I wrote my May 2024 editorial on the ethics of using commercial detection tools. Our current process doesn’t involve those tools because when we designed and developed it, detection was still heavily flawed. Adding their products would have decreased the accuracy of the pattern-based solution I had developed. The number of false positives and negatives was simply unacceptable and I observed an even greater error rate when it came to works written by non-native English speakers, a group we want to see participating in the process.

 When I wrote that editorial, I could see that things were changing. Today, when I observe various hot-takes about detection on social media, I can’t help but consider them out of touch and stuck in 2023. If you listen to them, those tools should never be used if even one person is flagged incorrectly.

 The truth of the matter is that detection tools will never be 100% accurate. There isn’t a person reading this who doesn’t rely on a spam filter to manage their email inbox. Those tools have been in development for over thirty years and they still make mistakes. We live with that because the alternative isn’t viable. We compensate for its weaknesses by checking our spam filter and pulling back anything we believe it incorrectly classified as spam. That’s how “AI” detection should be used and, even without commercial detectors, that’s how I’m currently monitoring our submissions. Anything my system deprioritizes as “suspicious” ends up on my desk for a final evaluation. Technology should never have the last word and it won’t at Clarkesworld. 

 We should, however, be suspicious of the companies providing detection tools. I’ve been regularly evaluating these products since 2023 and have found some incredibly dubious vendors. Companies that sell detection and detection-avoidance products. Companies that keep the text you submit and don’t provide a method for you to opt-out. Companies that use that same text to train LLMs. The list goes on. I previously outlined my own expectations for an ethical detection service:

 Does not use or license works submitted for analysis for training purposes without explicit permission. 

 Company is respectful of the rights of creatives in all of their products. 

 Accuracy, even with non-native English writers. 

 Has an API capable of supporting DOCX and RTF files. 

 Affordable for a short fiction publication. 

 Does not sell a product that prevents generated text from being detected. 

 Fortunately, that particular unicorn does exist and would be willing to sign a contract that says as much and more. Confidentiality is the highest criteria we should have with regards to submissions and there are actually people who understand that. As they are today, their tools would improve the accuracy of what we’ve built, even against the rising tide of hybrid or altered text. That may make the difference between staying open or closing, if things continue to get worse.

 If any of that makes you nervous, it’s not something you need to worry about right now, but you should be thinking about it. We’re not at the point where we want to take that leap, but I can see that day coming in the not-so-distant future. How soon depends on how the other side behaves. I’d like to believe that people will come to their senses and stop sending us generated stories or co-writing with something that has produced some of the worst stories I’ve read. Realistically, I know that won’t be the case. That means being prepared and embracing transparency. There are many discussions to have between now and that day.

 Let’s have that conversation.

 Author profile

 Neil Clarke 

 Website 

 Neil Clarke is the editor of Clarkesworld Magazine, Forever Magazine, and several anthologies, including the Best Science Fiction of the Year series. He is a four-time winner of the Hugo Award for Best Editor Short Form, three-time winner of the Locus Award for Best Editor, a four-time winner of the Chesley Award for Best Art Director, and a recipient of the Kate Wilhelm Solstice Award. He currently lives in NJ with his wife and two sons.

 Other Works

 Neil Clarke

 https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/

 Editor's Desk: The Other Shoe by Neil Clarke 

 Neil Clarke

 https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/

 Editor's Desk: A European Adventure and More by Neil Clarke 

 Neil Clarke

 https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/

 Editor's Desk: July Is for Survivors by Neil Clarke 

 Neil Clarke

 https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/

 Editor's Desk: One for the Team by Neil Clarke 

 Neil Clarke

 https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/

 Editor's Desk: The Stars in Our Sky by Neil Clarke 

 Share this page on:

 PURCHASE THIS ISSUE:

 Amazon Kindle 

 Amazon Print Edition 

 Apple Books EPUB 

 B&N EPUB 

 Bookshop.org EPUB 

 Fable EPUB 

 Kobo EPUB 

 Weightless EPUB/MOBI/PDF 

 Browse By

 Fiction 

 Audio Fiction 

 Articles 

 Interviews 

 Editorials 

 Awards & Recognition 

 Authors & Artists 

 Random Story 

 Random Podcast 

 Follow Us On 

 SUBSCRIBE AT 

 B&N Nook Newsstand 

 Patreon 

 ClarkesworldCitizens 

 Weightless Books 

 Search for: 

 ISSN 1937-7843 · Clarkesworld Magazine © 2006-2026 Wyrm Publishing. Robot illustration by Serj Iulian.