Science Fiction, Fantasy, Horror, Mystery, Thriller & Suspense, and Other Speculative Fiction
Interlibrary Loan is the brilliant follow-up to A Borrowed Man: the final work of fiction from multi-award winner and national literary treasure Gene Wolfe
Hundreds of years in the future our civilization is shrunk down but we go on. There is advanced technology, there are robots.
E. A. Smithe is a borrowed person, his personality an uploaded recording of a deceased mystery writer. Smithe is a piece of property, not a legal human.
As such, Smithe can be loaned to other branches. Which he is. Along with two fellow reclones, a cookbook and romance writer, they are shipped to Polly’s Cove, where Smithe meets a little girl who wants to save her mother, a father who is dead but perhaps not.
And another E.A. Smithe… who definitely is.
Please enjoy this excerpt of Interlibrary Loan, available 6/30/2020.
In the evening, when the library has closed, the ’bots have locked the big front doors, and everything is quiet, I hear once more the patter of Chandra’s black Mary Janes on our white Neostone floor. It seems strange, but now that we’re back home I can’t stop thinking about Chandra. Or Audrey, whom Chandra called “the lady captain.” About the girl I knew once and the woman who had loved and accepted me. What it was like for the three of us on board the Three Sisters. How we had looked over the rail sometimes, peering straight down through clear blue water and beholding the ravening monsters of the deep.
Am I or am I not the master of my thoughts? When I choose not to think of those things, my mind fills with thoughts of Dr. Fevre and his brother, and of all the wondrous things Dr. Fevre had accomplished—all of those things and the green box, too. Was he a wizard? I had done a few impossible things myself.
At other times my mind spins with all the thousands of things that happened then. Sometimes I do my best to think only of the good things—of the pure and shining things, because I know that destiny and the world are not all dark. Love is more real than the longest river, and kindness means more than any mountain range.
When I have finished deciding on all the thousand things I can never forget about Colette Coldbrook and the crude little mine that circles some other star, I promised myself I would never write about anything like that again. No! Not ever again! Because it hurts too much and tears my soul to shreds when I strive to think back on all those things: Audrey, the boundless sea, Cadaver Island, Buck Baston, the dead girls, and all the rest. Now I cannot banish those things from my thoughts. The high, empty, echoing, haunted house at the top of the hill and all the rest of it. The click of high, hard heels in another room on another floor. Now it seems to me that writing down all the most important events here may help me clear my mind and let me think instead of the little empty things going on in this unmeaning museum now. Things over and done with when I have finished. If I ever do.
Or anyway I dare to hope that this writing may.
Now where to start? What would you like to read about, dear unborn fully human patron, and what must you read about first if you are to understand the rest? Perhaps I should begin when we left—but just a day or two before that might be better. Too soon a start outshines too late, or at least so it seems to me. If I should begin a bit too soon, please leave a note in this manuscript advising any future readers to skip my soft, overripe beginning and jump to the true beginning as you would yourself if you were ever to read all this again—instructing your future self to begin to read on page whatever when all the dull machinery of importance has been set in motion.
So I’m going to go way far back and start my story where I want to, with graceful Rose and my friend Millie.
Millie Baumgartner is like me, a reclone resource here in the Spice Grove Public Library; and I’m sure she looks quite a bit older than she really is. Gray streaks in her lustrous brown hair, lines in her face, and a little too plump; but she has a wonderful smile that she was not using when she came up to me and whispered, “They’re going to get rid of us, Ern. Have you heard?”
The Fire did not seem likely so soon for either of us; so I shook my head, more than a little bit puzzled.
“We’re going east in a beautiful new truck. Brand new and really elegant.”
I stopped myself from saying, “Huh?” and shut my mouth instead.
“The new truck means the Continental Library. They say that’s where it goes.”
I said, “If they were going to burn us, they could do it in the incinerator here, Millie. You know they could.”
She did not say a word, so after I’d given her a good chance to, I went back to talking. “You wrote all those wonderful cookbooks. Sometimes it seems like you get checked out three times a week.”
That made her smile, honest and warm. “You’re a sweet boy, Ern. Thank you.”
“I doubt it. Truthful, though.” I’ve got to talk like that, just in case you’re wondering. I have to talk exactly like the exposition in the first Ern A. Smithe’s books, whether I like it or not. My brain was hardwired for it from the beginning, and I cannot do one damned thing about it no matter how much it embarrasses me.
“I’m a terrible troublemaker, Ern. I criticize the groceries and the cooking. Sometimes I go into the kitchen and try to teach the cooks how to make a tossed salad. They don’t like it one little bit.”
That must have made me smile. “They should be grateful.” “Yes indeed. And everybody everywhere ought to be a whole lot nicer, but saying so doesn’t help.”
I agreed but couldn’t keep from grinning.
Millie tapped my chest with her index finger. “You’re a troublemaker, too, Ern. You’re a big one.”
Pure as snow I declared that I tried not to be.
“Well you are, just the same.” Her plump finger tapped my chest again. “Shall I list all your faults?”
I just about laughed at that one. “Dinner’s in another hour, and you’ll need a lot more time.”
“Later, maybe.” Millie sighed and started over. “It’s you and me and Rose.” By that time I had noticed her orange tag. Now she held it up. “A ’bot’s looking for you right this minute with one of these. It says ‘AA twenty-three.’ AA means the new truck.”
It did, and the orange tag also meant interlibrary loan. Those numbers on the tag told the ’bots which truck to which library; it seemed to me that for Continental the number ought to have been one, but that was not what was on our tags. It should have tipped me off right away, but I wasn’t sharp enough to get it.
About an hour later they handed out navy-blue winter coats and put the three of us in the truck—that was Millie, Rose Romain the romance writer, and me. When I had ridden in one of those trucks before, interlibrary loan had meant sitting on stacks of books in the back, and it had been bumpy and too dark to read back there. This was way better than that. Just to start, we were not really riding in the truck. The truck pulled a couple of big trailers, and we were in the second one. There were about two hundred disks, cubes, and real old-fashioned books with pages in it with us; but it was specially fitted out for reclones like the three of us, for breathing, bleeding library resources who didn’t count as fully humans and could be torn to pieces by angry patrons pretty much at will. Read my first book if you don’t understand. It’s here too.
Now back to the truck and its trailers.
The biggest plus of all was that our trailer was adequately heated. Another big, big plus was plumbing; there was a chemical toilet with a green curtain around it, and a washbasin, far better than a bucket of water and a hole in the floor.
There were narrow fold-up bunks on both sides, too; upper and lower bunks, not cushy but almost as good as the soft, self- heated mats we slept on in the library. These bunks were, as Millie put it, actual beds that you could fall out of. By fully human standards that trailer was crowded and uncomfortable; but I remembered the truck I had ridden in when Owenbright sent me back to Spice Grove, and this one was a long ton better. Up there I should have mentioned that there were lights in- side, too, bright bottled sunshine we could turn on and off; and there were strong primary colors all over, red and blue mostly. But the main thing as far as I was concerned was that there were windows. I had expected no windows, and if somebody had told me there would be windows, I would have expected no tint. These were variables, which gave us a fine opportunity to argue about which ones should be light and which ones dark, and which of the dark ones were too dark or not dark enough. You know.
Millie and I wanted all of them pretty clear, and Rose wanted all of them black, so nobody could stare at her and maybe make finger signs. Rose was a redhead, ghost-pale and slender only at the waist; she looked to be about twenty. How old she was really I have no idea. (With reclones like the three of us you can never know for sure, because what if we’re not telling you the truth?) Millie looked about fifty, and my guess was thirty or forty. Rose? Who the hell knew? She had to have a shelf right next to the floor, meaning a Number One because she said men—meaning me—would try to look up her skirt if she had to climb a ladder. Listening to her argue about that with the ’bots and cry at the librarians, I got to where I would have tried it just to keep her happy. If you’ve been wondering why Millie called Rose a troublemaker, now you know.
So three troublemakers on their way to Continental, or at least that’s what we thought.
Copyright © 2020 by Gene Wolfe
Books: I Like Them, Who Could Have Guessed?
What Makes This Book So Great author Jo Walton talks – what else? – books. Read more →
A Darkling Sea author James L. Cambias talks about creating his world of Ilmatar. Read more →
Giant Hawks and Mountain Bikes: Alternative Training
Could you handle it? The Emperor’s Blades author Brian Staveley talks adventure racing. Read more →
Publisher of SF, Fantasy, Horror, Mystery, Thriller, and Other Spec Fiction. Tag us or hashtag #torbooks in your bookstagrams & we might repost them!
Happy Friday, y'all! We are back with another #swe Are you ready to join @nytimes bestselling author Only a few months until #TheBookEaters by @sunyide We're celebrating instant @usatoday and @americanb A Very Happy #BookBirthday to #TheWitnessfortheDea Have you pre-ordered your copy of #TheFirstBinding Have you entered our #DaughterofRedwinter sweepsta 'What sort of man walked into death like that? How It's the last stop in the #BookofNight tour and wh Happy Friday, y'all! Do we have the #sweepstakes f From the mind that brought you DR. STRANGE and THE TONIGHT: Join @blackholly in conversation with the Load More... Follow on Instagram CategoriesAuthor Features Behind the Scenes eBook Deals Events Excerpts Lists New Releases Short Fiction Sweepstakes Tor Labs Tor Newsletter What’s New Video Meta Log in Entries feed Comments feed WordPress.org
About • Careers • Contact Us • FAQ & Submissions
Privacy Notice • Ads and Cookies • Terms of Use
