   
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
Making Myth: Narrative Discourse in The Shadow of the Torturer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                             
 
 
 
 
                                                                                              
 
 
 
                                                                                             Charles Simmons 
  Masters Thesis in English Literature 
                                                                                             Spring 2019 
Centre for Languages and Literature 
                                                                                             Lund University 
                                                                                             Supervisor: Cian Duffy 
   
 
Abstract 
 
This dissertation argues that the incongruity between the narrating I and the narrated I in The 
Shadow of the Torturer produces a site where myth is made. The novel differs from other 
works in the canon of science fantasy because its science and fantasy are rarely, if ever, 
juxtaposed. Instead, I argue that whatever technological understandings the narrator obtains 
throughout their journey are reproduced as myth. Myth is treated as the fusion of scientific 
and fantastic worldviews. This dissertation focuses on the events found in The Shadow of the 
Torturer while addressing other novels in Gene Wolfe’s greater Solar Cycle when relevant. 
The background section provides the reader with an historical overview of science fantasy’s 
two parent genres and identifies the basic features which define a work as either science 
fiction or fantasy. Also included in the background section is an introduction to Gerard 
Genette’s narratological concepts of mood and voice. The analysis section begins by looking 
at the peculiarities of Severian’s discourse through the lenses of these two concepts. Having 
thus established the way in which the novel’s narrative is constructed, the final section 
explores Severian’s mythic vision. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Table of Contents 
 
Introduction                                                                                                          1 
Science Fantasy – A Brief History of Genre(s)                                                    3 
Narratology: Mood and Voice                                                                             10  
A Note on Myth                                                                                                   14 
On Mood: A Question of Distance and Perspective                                            15 
On Voice: A Question of Time, Levels, and Person                                           28 
The Myth of Urth                                                                                                 39 
Conclusion                                                                                                           50 
Bibliography                                                                                                        53 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simmons 1 
 
   
 
Introduction 
 
Gene Wolfe writes what is considered genre, or popular fiction. But anyone would be hesitant 
to call his work popular.1 Nevertheless, his contemporaries working in the fields of science 
fiction and fantasy have recognized and lauded his accomplishments. Ursula K. Le Guin is 
quoted on the front cover of The Fifth Head of Cerberus (1972) as having said it is “a subtle, 
ingenious, poetic, and picturesque book”. Likewise, Neil Gaiman’s proclamation that Wolfe 
is the “smartest, subtlest, most dangerous writer alive today” appears square on the back 
panel of The Knight (2004). Endangered Species (1989) is stamped with a paraphrased 
review from Publishers Weekly claiming it illustrates “the sometimes elusive, always 
challenging vision of an author whose love for language exceeds the boundaries of genre”, 
and in response to Wolfe’s magnum opus, The Book of the New Sun (1980-83), Ian Watson 
likens it to “a chain of conjuror’s scarves...for what we sense as each emerges is a new and 
deeper level of reality beneath the one that dazzled us just now”. While these 
recommendations are all glowing in one way or another, they reveal a common observation: 
that in Wolfe there is something just beyond reach which adds to his appeal. His writing is at 
turns subtle, elusive, or magic, the stuff of a conjuror, whose power always lies in what they 
conceal from their audience. 
          This raises a series of intriguing questions: just what eludes the reader of Wolfe? 
Wherein does his subtlety lie? And how can an object be subtle yet picturesque? Part of the 
problem is that Wolfe writes neither science fiction nor fantasy strictly speaking, so that even 
determining his genre is difficult. The Shadow of the Torturer (1980), henceforth referred to 
as Shadow, is emblematic of this generic discrepancy. Initially, it presents what Brian 
Attebery in Strategies of Fantasy (1992) calls the “distanced, quasi-medieval worlds” (42) 
typical of sword-and-sorcery fantasy. The protagonist Severian’s gaze comes to rest upon 
many of the icons typically associated with fantasy. There is an imposing citadel, a barbican, 
and an assemblage of guards bearing pikes. Characters talk of witches who “have 
supernatural knowledge and premonitions” (Andre-Driussi 375), and Severian even carries an 
amulet which may or may not be magical. But the reader, through subtle clues, discovers that 
Shadow is no stock medieval fantasy; rather, Severian’s world is a future earth (Urth), so far-
flung that the dichotomy between old and new is essentially overturned, or at the very least, 
                                                           
1 See The New Yorker article “Sci-Fi’s Difficult Genius” (April 2015) by Peter Bebergal for a 
discussion on Wolfe’s lack of popular appeal.  
Simmons 2 
 
   
 
obscured. Shadow is a case of overlap, what Attebery calls “a hybrid form” (106), which 
results in the subgenre “science fantasy”. 
          What the reader knows of Urth is inextricably tied to what Severian knows of it. 
Narrated in the first-person, Shadow functions as a kind of quasi-autobiography in the vein of 
Marcel Proust’s A la recherche du temps perdu (1913). Due to this, there is no analytic or 
omniscient narrator to fill in the blanks of Severian’s apprehension; the questions of who sees 
and who speaks find consolidation in him alone. In this sense, any elusion on behalf of the 
novel is due to the narration of its proposed “author”: Severian the Lame, Autarch in the last 
year of the old sun. The quirkiness of Severian’s narration should not be understood as a 
strategy, but suggests, more significantly, the very epistemological constitution of the world 
he inhabits. Significances sometimes elude the reader because they defy Severian as well. 
This is a world in which incredible interstellar technologies can appear old, mythic, 
sometimes sword-and-sorcery fantastic and vice versa.  
          While not entirely novel, as stories fusing elements from science fiction and fantasy 
range from the early pulp endeavors of Edgar Rice Burroughs to Ursula Le Guin’s “Hainish 
Cycle” (1966-1974), there is something peculiar about Shadow at the level of its narrative 
discourse. According to Attebery, “the effect of these stories [science fantasy] is a product of 
their juxtaposition of two rhetorics, two ways of speaking about and, hence, of perceiving the 
fictional universe” (119). Attebery goes on to stress that the achievements of Le Guin rely on 
the “contrast between high and lower technologies” (121; emphasis added), and as it pertains 
to Le Guin’s The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), “the story would not be complete without 
both kinds of narratives” (121). Thus, the productive quality of science fantasy would lie not 
only in combining the two genres, but in the contrast of their respective worldviews. 
          The following dissertation will argue that Shadow departs from the way in which 
Attebery claims generic fusion applies to science fantasy. Instead of juxtaposing fantastic and 
scientific elements, so making each mode of seeing explicit, Wolfe avoids any marked 
dialogue between the two in order to bring about “the undivided perception from which myth 
emerged” (Attebery 119). Severian’s vision is mythic precisely because it does not 
distinguish between the two. This is embodied in the manner Severian describes the 
autonomous spacecraft which takes him to Ocean: “that ship was worked by hands I could 
not see” (Sword & Citadel 544). It is the narrator’s inability to concretize the things of their 
lifeworld as either technological or magical which produces that quality which Wolfe’s peers 
laud as his unique subtlety, elusiveness, or magic. Severian’s is a metaphysic just out of 
reach. 
Simmons 3 
 
   
 
Science Fantasy – A Brief History of Genre(s) 
 
Science fantasy results from combining elements from science fiction (SF) and fantasy 
literature. Virtually any bookstore one visits is bound to lump the two genres together; they 
share the same shelf space, and typically attract a similar audience2. In addition to this, Brian 
Attebery claims that the genres sometimes overlap thematically. This overlap results in what 
is defined as science fantasy, “a hybrid form [that] can with equal justice be defined either as 
a form of fantasy that borrows from science fiction or as a subgenre of science fiction 
drawing inspiration from fantasy” (Attebery 106). Before venturing further into the domain 
of science fantasy, it is worth investigating the particularities of its parent genres, SF and 
fantasy. 
          In the introduction to The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction (2003), Farah 
Mendlesohn states that “[s]cience fiction is less a genre – a body of writing from which one 
can expect certain plot elements and specific tropes – than an ongoing discussion” (1). 
Because of this, SF is at liberty to experiment with the tropes and plot structures that define 
other genres, even those considered realistic. For example, in the mystery novel there is 
always something to be ‘unraveled’ or solved. Likewise, the romance invariably involves the 
confrontation of two individuals and the reconciliation of their passions. In a work of horror, 
the “intrusion of the unnatural into the world” (The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 
2) is bound to occur, such as the invisible monster in H. P. Lovecraft’s The Dunwich Horror 
(1929) which quite literally bursts upon and rampages the Massachusetts countryside. If SF 
can conceivably borrow elements from any available literary genre, what gives it a 
recognizable form so that one can even begin to approach it as a genre?  
          Mendlesohn argues that all instances of SF are “centered on what has been termed the 
‘sense of wonder’” (The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 3). She even goes so far 
as to write that “[f]or the first fifteen years of the development of genre sf (from the mid-
1920s), it was the basic narrative” (The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 3). Early, 
golden-age examples of genre SF usually relied on the representation of marvelous 
inventions, or on the protagonist’s arrival at an alien place3. These themes carry with them 
questions of “what if?” which are still crucial to contemporary SF, “and has led to the most 
                                                           
2 See Brian Attebery’s discussion on the development of genres in his chapter on Science Fantasy in 
Strategies of Fantasy (105-107).  
3 See Mendlesohn’s discussion on early, golden-age SF in their introduction to The Cambridge 
Companion to Science Fiction (1-11). 
Simmons 4 
 
   
 
popular interpretation of ‘sf’: speculative fiction” (The Cambridge Companion to Science 
Fiction 4).  
          To speculate and wonder, to be occupied with the outlandishly possible: this is the 
emotional heart of SF literature. Brian Stableford, in his chapter on the history of pre-genre 
SF, presents the argument that the earliest examples of SF originated in utopian fantasy, 
“whose usual narrative form was the imaginary voyage” (The Cambridge Companion to 
Science Fiction 15). This form offered writers the freedom to speculate on various what ifs, 
such as Johannes Kepler’s A Dream (1634), which “includes an ingenious attempt to imagine 
how life on the moon might have adapted to the long cycle of day and night” (The Cambridge 
Companion to Science Fiction 16). Nevertheless, these tales, according to Stableford, labored 
under several handicaps. Stableford cites a “chronic frivolity” that infected the stories as they 
entered regions which pedestrians or sea-faring ships could not access. Writers at the time 
simply could not rely on scientific know-how to make their speculations plausible, and 
gaining access to the future could only be represented through dream states or having their 
characters sleep for incredibly long periods of time.4 Furthermore, in these early works of 
utopian fiction scientists themselves were often targets of satire, rather than celebration. 
While utopian fantasy was speculative, it was not strictly scientific.              
         Stableford notes that “[m]odern historians of sf often locate the origins of British 
scientific romance in the works of Mary Shelley, although the Gothic trappings of 
Frankenstein (1818) place it firmly within the tradition of anti-science fiction” (The 
Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 19).  Instead, Stableford sees Edgar Allen Poe’s 
prefatory essay attached to reprints of “The Unparalleled Adventure of One Hans Pfaall” 
(1835) as “the first tentative manifesto for modern sf” (The Cambridge Companion to 
Science Fiction 19). This is because the essay stressed the need for verisimilitude when it 
came to speculation about the future and the extension of travellers’ tales beyond earth’s 
atmosphere. For the speculative aspect of SF to really function, it had to be rooted in the 
scientifically plausible, not the mere fantastic. Essentially, Poe demonstrated the limitations 
of both travellers’ tales and visionary fantasies by exposing their very non-scientific 
underpinnings and explanations.           
          Many subsequent authors championed Poe’s views, such as Jules Verne and M.P. 
Shiel, but it was H.G. Wells who really continued Poe’s determination to combine 
speculation with a degree of verisimilitude. As Stableford writes: 
                                                           
4 See Stableford’s chapter on early forms of SF in The Cambridge Guide to Science Fiction (15-31) 
Simmons 5 
 
   
 
            [t]he idea of mesmerically induced ‘true visions’ no longer commanded the least 
shred of plausibility,… he took advantage of articles by C.H. Hinton collected in 
Scientific Romances (1886), which popularized the idea of time as a ‘fourth 
dimension’, to provide an apologetic jargon for a new facilitating device: The Time 
Machine (1895). (The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 24) 
This is an example of speculation grounded in rational enquiry. Wells does not relegate his 
character’s access to the future by way of dreams or the extended sleep episodes of earlier 
utopian fantasies; rather, his characters seek justification in the scientifically plausible. In this 
case, the burgeoning notion of a fourth dimension. Stableford is convinced that “Wells 
single-handedly laid the groundwork for the distinctive methods of modern sf” (The 
Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 25). This influence is seen in “the magazine era” 
of SF (1926-1960), where “the best way to sneak in scientific content was to offer readers the 
traditional pleasures of popular fiction” (The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 33). 
The requirement for scientific validation extends to the New Wave and backwash SF of the 
70s and 80s, whose practitioners did not share their forebear’s blind allegiance to scientific 
method, but nevertheless grounded their work in a dialogue with scientific progress. A quick 
glance at relatively contemporary work in the field of SF shows a marked occupation with 
advancements in science, such as Kim Stanley Robinson’s Red Mars (1992), which projects a 
situation where Mars is terraformed by methods considered technically plausible at the time 
of its being written. 
          Thus, if SF is not a genre as Farah Mendlesohn claims, it can be viewed as a discourse 
that relies on scientifically grounded speculation. SF, for readers and authors alike, is the 
space in which one can reasonably dream of what the future may hold.  
          Fantasy, on the other hand, “is about the construction of the impossible” (1), as 
Mendlesohn argues in The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature (2012). It is, like 
SF, difficult to pin down or situate as a genre. In The American Tradition of Fantasy (2003), 
Brian Thomsen proposes that “we view fantasy as a group of texts that share, to a greater 
degree or other, a cluster of common tropes which may be objects but which may also be 
narrative techniques” (4). These tropes range from the portal-quest, which sees a protagonist 
enter another world, to the dragons, castles, and elves which characterize stock high fantasy. 
          Historically, fantasy is tied to the purely imaginative. In Elements of Criticism (1762), 
Lord Henry Home Kames writes that “this singular power of fabricating images without any 
foundation in reality is distinguished by the name imagination” (669). This immediately 
signals a break with SF, which demanded a foundation supplied by the realities of scientific 
Simmons 6 
 
   
 
progress. Gary K. Wolfe, in the chapter “Fantasy from Dryden to Dunsany”, claims that “it 
was Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s 1817 distinction between fancy and imagination that set the 
stage for […] critical debate […] and that arguably surrounded the birth of the modern 
fantasy narrative” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 9). For Coleridge, as 
Wolfe explains, fancy is a mode of memory, while “the imagination represents something 
new and entirely different” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 9). To imagine 
is to render the fantastic, the new, or the entirely alien not indebted to any memorial 
experience of the world. Still, Coleridge’s musings failed to really champion the fantastic in 
the public’s eyes, evidenced by Sir Walter Scott’s estimation in the essay “On the 
Supernatural in Fictitious Composition” (1827) that “fantastic elements be ‘rare, brief, 
indistinct’, yet characterized by ‘philosophical reasoning and moral truth” (4). This reveals an 
attitude which Wolfe claims dominated the late eighteenth century’s discourse around 
fantastic literature, where any fantastic invention “required some sort of extra-literary 
rationale” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 10), not entirely different than 
the thematic demands witnessed in the field of SF.  
          The link to modern fantasy materializes with the rise and subsequent popularity of the 
Kunstmärchen (literary fairy tales). Wolfe cites the 1812 story “The Elves” by Ludwig Tieck 
as a predecessor to the “portal fantasy” type touched upon previously in this chapter. In the 
story, a little girl crosses a forbidden bridge and “finds herself in a verdant world of tall, 
beautiful elves and elemental spirits” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 12). 
This illustrates fantasy literature’s unique mode of seeing: the speculation of things which are 
not bound to scientific plausibility but explore the wildly irrational – or in other words, the 
impossible.  
          The revival of literary fairy tales most likely had a significant influence on George 
MacDonald (1824-1905), “sometimes credited as the author of two of the earliest modern 
fantasy novels” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 13). Not only did 
MacDonald’s novels anticipate and prefigure modern fantasy narratives, but he was a friend 
of Charles Dodgson, and “urged Dodgson to publish what would become the most famous of 
all Victorian fantasies, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (1863)” (The Cambridge 
Companion to Fantasy Literature 14). The influence of German fairytales is immense in the 
Victorian era, which is often seen as “something of a golden age of children’s fantasy” (The 
Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 14). Avril Coleridge-Taylor wrote a German-
influenced fairy tale titled Phantasmion (1837), which among other things fantastic contained 
a fully realized secondary world. The construction of a “secondary world” is vital for modern 
Simmons 7 
 
   
 
fantasies of the “immersed” set, from Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings (1954) to Steven Erikson’ 
popular high fantasy Gardens of the Moon (1999). 
          But the success of the fantastic during the Victorian period is not relegated to 
children’s literature. Wolfe claims there was a “substantial tradition of adult fantasy, even if it 
operated nearly in exile” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 14). He goes on 
to mention how the “ghost story” thrived during this period, as seen in Charles Dickens’ 
classic A Christmas Carol (1843), and other stories which featured substantial fantastic 
elements like Joseph Sheridan Le Fanu’s Carmilla (1872), an example of early vampire 
literature. During this period William Morris, “[t]oday largely remembered for his association 
with the Pre-Raphaelite brotherhood and the arts and crafts movement” (The Cambridge 
Companion to Fantasy Literature 15), produced an extended short story that contained a 
detailed secondary world which had “a crucial influence on fantasy writers such as David 
Lindsay and J. R. R. Tolkien” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature 15). These 
secondary worlds represent a construction of the impossible, which decidedly set them apart 
from their SF brethren. Instead of a what if based on the possibilities afforded by 
contemporary science, they are founded on unbounded imaginary visions: they contain 
worlds and events which simply never were and perhaps never be.  
          If the nineteenth century started as an age of the rediscovery of folk and fairy tales, 
largely borrowed from the work of German writers, Wolfe asserts that “it ended with a 
renewed interest in returning to these same materials” (The Cambridge Companion to 
Fantasy Literature 18). Among the most prominent to recycle the fantastic borrowed from 
folk tales was W.B. Yeats, with his Fairy and Folk tales of the Irish Peasantry (1888), which 
celebrated the mythic. It was also towards the close of the century that animal fantasies “took 
on a new and more sophisticated literary life” (The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy 
Literature 18), such as Rudyard Kipling’s Jungle Book (1894) and Kenneth Grahame’s The 
Wind in the Willows (1908), both of which contained figures of the utterly impossible.  
          This triumph of the imaginary in a time of almost fanatical rationality had far reaching 
implications for the fantasy of today, or genre fantasy as it is typically referred to. No longer 
were imagined impossibilities seen as mere flights of fancy. To construct images that had no 
correlating realistic foundation5 came to be a legitimate way of narrating in its own right. 
This led to a new appreciation of the fantastic and fostered the careers of Tolkien, C.S. Lewis 
and Charles Williams, to name only a few. 
                                                           
5 See Fredric Jameson in Archaeologies of the Future for a more critical view of this conviction (57-
71) 
Simmons 8 
 
   
 
          Returning to the hybrid genre of science fantasy, which Shadow is routinely labeled, it 
is now easier to determine just what Attebery means when he writes that the “fictional form 
[is] able to make sure of the conventions of science fiction and those of genre fantasy to 
comment on one another” (106). Both conventions speculate or imagine scenarios outside of 
what has been, though one is bounded by the reasonably possible, and the other defined by its 
very impossibility. Or, as Fredric Jameson argues in Archaeologies of the Future, fantasy 
“dreams [a] non-historical vision” (60), whilst SF is saturated by a mode-of-production 
awareness: it is historized. In Shadow, these two metaphysical visions are somehow 
juxtaposed, or better yet, fused. 
          In Attebery’s assessment of science fantasy, it is hard not to hear the negative 
overtones he attributes to traditional SF, and the positives to fantasy which, when combined 
with the discourse of SF, works to cover up some of the latter’s inherent flaws. For example, 
Attebery calls the “megatext” of science into question, arguing that “it becomes less and less 
possible to write about certain things and still call upon that megatext” (108) since certain 
"icons” or standards in the field of SF have been disputed by science itself. Things which 
used to have speculative power, such as interstellar travel, aliens, and the colonization of 
remote planets have been cast in doubt by recent technological understandings6. By adding 
fantasy to the equation, the result has the power to “challenge SF, partly because it pays its 
own tribute to science” (Attebery 108). This is because “impossibility itself, one of the 
elements of fantasy, is defined largely through reference to the current scientific worldview” 
(Attebery 108). Because fantasy essentially affirms impossibility, any flaw that the rational 
megatext of science may reveal is instead opened onto the realm of myth. But myth is no 
mere make-believe or code-word for a dead megatext, for as Attebery asserts, they “yet retain 
their narrative momentum and […] their congruence with the ways we wish we saw the 
world” (109).  
          One of the earliest examples of science fantasy fusion, according to Attebery, is found 
in the work of Edgar Rice Burroughs. In A Princess of Mars (1912), Burroughs uses “the 
terminology of science fiction for the apparatus of fantasy [which] freed himself from much 
of the obligation of both forms” (Attebery 112). Fantasy is restricted because of its obligation 
to narrative closures associated with traditional storylines: the epic quest, the coming-of-age 
story, and the apocalyptic battle all demand this kind of formal closure. SF, on the other hand, 
is restricted due to its dependence on the megatext of science, which requires the laws of 
                                                           
6 See Attebery’s discussion of this in the chapter on science fantasy in Strategies of Fantasy (116). 
Simmons 9 
 
   
 
physics or biology to justify itself. This allowed Burroughs to weave a narrative “ostensibly 
based on astronomical observation but more closely akin to the lost-world fantasies of H. 
Rider Haggard” (Attebery 112) while being free of the ethical consistency demanded by 
fantasy. But not all science fantasy hinges on the writer's desire for formal emancipation. 
Many of the titles Attebery cites as exemplary of the genre, such as the work of Andre 
Norton, Anne McCaffrey, and Ursula K. Le Guin, reveal a desire to “combine the truths 
accessible to each” (Attebery 121) in order to arrive at a new way of seeing. But Attebery, in 
a curious move, abandons his original proposal that the power of these works results from 
their ability to fuse the scientific and fantastic. For example, when discussing Le Guin's 
Rocannnon's World (1966), he writes: “[t]he mix is largely successful and would be more so 
if...she had kept her magic more rigorously scientific and her magic less eclectic” (121). 
Likewise, Samuel Delany's genius lies in his ability to “juxtapose the rational and emotional 
or scientific and magical perspectives” (Attebery 121). Given these examples, and the general 
rhetorical thrust of Attebery's chapter on science fantasy, it would seem the genre's main 
function is to contrast the opposing worldviews in order to better reveal their respective sets 
of logic.  
          Attebery admits that the case is different in The Book of the New Sun and The Urth of 
the New Sun. In admiration of Wolfe’s accomplishments, he states that “the imagined world 
[Urth] easily accepts the discourse of either form, for it projects a time when advanced 
technology represents not the future but the distant past” (123). And due to the naivety of the 
narrating instance, these technologies of the “past” are never entirely determined as 
technological, but appear quasi-magical, which in turn “may be only technology more 
advanced still” (Attebery 123). Attebery goes on to suggest that every facet of Severian’s tale 
is mythic, and that each step “involves his learning another lost secret of the technological 
past and thereby gaining more control over his life” (124). Conversely, this dissertation will 
argue that it is the very opposite of this that makes the novel mythological. Though Severian 
may gain more knowledge of the past, it is rarely, if ever, a technological understanding of 
things. And even when something technological is imparted to him, it does not register as a 
technology per se. Additionally, it never feels, throughout the course of Shadow or the 
entirety of The Book of the New Sun, that Severian gains any control over his life. If anything, 
myth is layered upon myth, and anything that may be technological is subsumed by the 
ambivalence of the telling. Severian always feels compelled by something higher. It is in this 
unique way that Shadow and the subsequent novels in the tetralogy make use of science 
fantasy’s double vision. 
Simmons 10 
 
   
 
Narratology: Mood and Voice 
 
In the foreword to Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method (1980), Jonathan Culler tells the 
reader that “someone who wanted to learn about cars would have no trouble finding a 
manual, [but] there is no comparable work for the student of literature” (7). Essentially, 
concepts such as “point of view”, “first-person narrator”, “flashbacks” and the like have 
developed over the considerable history of literature studies but had never been systematized. 
Gerard Genette’s labor was an attempt to do just that. Genette sought to “identify, name, and 
illustrate the basic constituents and techniques of narrative” (Genette 7). Genette does this by 
submitting Marcel Proust’s A la recherche du temps perdu to the formal concepts of order, 
duration, frequency, mood, and voice. In his study, Genette is not aiming to interpret Proust’s 
novel, but instead dwell on the formal complexity of Proust’s unusual, quasi-autobiographical 
narrative. As Culler points out, this approach allows Genette to expose the “strangeness of 
Proustian discourse, constantly pointing out how bizarre a construction this novel is” (9). In a 
similar fashion, my aim is not to interpret or derive any ultimate meaning(s) from Severian’s 
narrative, but to expose some of the ways its mythic vision is accomplished. 
          This dissertation will borrow two concepts which Genette develops at length in 
Narrative Discourse. These are “mood” and “voice”, both of which are related to the way in 
which the discourse is told.  
         The mood of a text hinges on the speaker’s capacity to “tell more or tell less what one 
tells, and [tell] it according to one point of view or another” (Genette 162; original 
emphasis). These features determine, to a large degree, the amount in which a narrative is 
shown or told. To illustrate this, Genette uses an example lifted from Book III of The 
Republic (381 BC), where Plato contrasts the two modes by rewriting a scene from Homer’s 
Iliad (1260-1180 BC) which was originally mimetic in construction. In the original version, 
Homer writes, “So said he, and the old man was afraid and obeyed his word, and faired 
silently along the shore of the loud-sounding sea. Then went that aged man apart and prayed 
aloud to King Apollo, whom Leto of the fair locks bare” (Iliad, I, 33). In this excerpt, two 
features which define a mimetic text are brought to bear: the amount of information (details) 
and the relative absence of any speaker. Conversely, in Plato’s rewriting, two things occur: 
there is a suppression of superfluous, or picturesque detail, and the fact that it is told is made 
overt. No longer does it contain realistic effects such as “the loud-sounding sea” and “the fair 
Simmons 11 
 
   
 
locks bare”, and instead of employing direct speech, Plato writes it entirely in direct dialogue, 
exposing the fact that this is indeed a mediation. The scene no longer tells itself.  
          Plato’s rewriting affects what Genette metaphorically describes as “distance”. For 
example, in Homer’s original, the old man “faired silently along the shore of the loud-
sounding sea”, details which seek to bring the reader into the scene as if they were also 
experiencing the material reality of the situation alongside the focalizer. The act of direct 
speech “so said he” works to make the reader “forget that it is the narrator telling” (Genette 
166). These “cardinal precepts” of showing, which is defined by “a maximum of information 
and a minimum of the informer” (Genette 166) produce a mood. In this case, one of self-
immanence: the reader is invited into Homer’s world, one in which “delight in physical 
existence is everything to them [the world’s inhabitants]” (Auerbach 13). Whereas in Plato’s 
version the reader hears of the world from a distance. In Homer, the narration comes from 
within the story (direct discourse), whereas in Plato, the narrator is without, looking down on 
events from up high: “And the old man on hearing this was frightened and departed in 
silence” (Genette 165). Mood is determined by the position of the narrator in relation to what 
is told.  
          The category “voice” is not concerned with the way a narrative is told, but with “who 
tells it, where, and when” (Genette 212). Effectively, it focuses on the situation of the speaker 
in time and space. Genette calls this the “narrating instance”. This situation is not to be 
confused with the instance of the author writing the work, as Genette points out “the role of 
the narrator is [always] itself fictive, even if assumed directly by the author” (213).  
          The examination of voice is restricted to the elements of “time of narrating”, “narrative 
level”, and “person”, though this dissertation will take “place” into account as well. “Time of 
narrating” focuses on the interval between the narrated action and the narrating instance. 
Shadow is told in the past tense, but this does not necessarily indicate “the temporal interval 
which separates the moment of the narrating from the moment of the story” (Genette 220). 
What is more, this interval can and inevitably does change throughout the course of the 
narrative. The more a narrator tells of his past, invariably the closer the story comes to the 
instance of its narration. This shortening is not readily felt by the reader, for narrative has the 
queer function of making its duration irrelevant: the narrating would seem to involve an 
instantaneous action, or the representation of a constant present. This makes “time of 
narrating” a fascinating inquiry. As Genette notes, in reference to A la recherche du temps 
perdu, “the uniform use of the past tense...does not allow this gradual shrinking to be 
imprinted in the very texture of the narrative discourse, but we have seen that to a certain 
Simmons 12 
 
   
 
extent Proust had succeeded in making it felt” (225). Thus, according to narratology, the 
critic’s task (as regards “time of narrating”) is to identify places in a narrative where the 
shortening of the interval between the narrating instance and the events narrated is made 
manifest. In a sense, quasi-autobiographical fiction never draws towards its end, but towards 
its origin: that moment the story overtakes or merges with its maker. 
          “Narrative level” distinguishes which events are inside the narrative proper, and which 
are without. Genette illustrates this by using an example from the French novel Manon 
Lescaut (1731), where the narrator Chevalier des Grieux speaks of past adventures to an 
audience in the “Lion d'or”. In this case, what separates the storytelling at the inn and the 
episodes recounted “is less a [temporal] distance than a sort of threshold represented by the 
narrating itself, a difference of level” (Genette 228; original emphasis). This shows how the 
actions of the hero, which one may think of as the main story, are contained and framed by 
another: the situation of it being told at the inn.  
          Genette stresses that “any event a narrative recounts is at a diegetic level immediately 
higher than the level at which the narrating act producing this narrative is placed” (228; 
original emphasis). This notion of embedded narratives can be better understood by using The 
Book of the New Sun as an example. Placing the events a narrator recounts at a level “higher” 
adds a kind of qualitative emphasis on the diegetic action, but what Genette means is that at 
the bottom (lowest), one places the extradiegetic narrator, in this case the ‘G.W.’ who has 
supposedly translated Severian’s manuscripts from a “a tongue that has not yet achieved 
existence” (Shadow 275). Next, on the second level, one is faced with the intradiegetic 
narrator: the Severian who narrates his past. The next, or third level, are the events the 
intradiegetic narrator recounts, though this is not necessarily the “highest”, depending on 
where one is in the course of the story. For example, the narrated Severian could begin his 
own story within the narrative, thus creating another “bubble”, or level, which would be the 
‘highest’ narrative level. For example, when Severian relates “The Tale of the Boy Called 
Frog” from his brown book in The Sword of the Lictor (1981) the narrative of Frog becomes 
the “highest”. Examining the levels in a narrative potentially calls the “primary” narrative 
into question. For example, in her review of Narrative Discourse, Shlomith Rimmon asks: 
“What, for example, is the primary narrative of Nabokov’s The Real Life of Sebastian 
Knight? Is it Sebastian’s reconstructed life or the narrator’s quest for his half brother’s 
biography?” (“Comprehensive Theory of Narrative” 59). Common sense would say that it is 
of course Sebastian’s life (hence the title), but a closer look at embedded levels may reveal 
that it is quite the opposite. The same goes for Shadow, whose primary narrative may not be 
Simmons 13 
 
   
 
what is first suggested but is only a commentary on the primary story: Severian’s impending 
religious-mystical advance into the stars. 
          The last category that Genette’s chapter on “voice” focuses on is the “person” of the 
narrator. “Person” is pertinent when dealing with an example of autobiographical fiction. As 
Genette notes, there are always two subjects the reader encounters: the narrating I and the 
narrated I. These are distinguished by “a difference in age and experience that authorizes the 
former to treat the latter with a sort of condescending or ironic superiority” (Genette 252). 
One need only think of their own memories in relation to their current self to see that this is 
undoubtedly the case. Time and experience have a way of changing who we are. Not only 
does the narrating I know more than the narrated I, he or she knows how their story will 
unfold: they know the secret which is withheld so that the reader can follow along with the 
narrated in their ignorance of the future. Genette argues that “the two voices can blend and 
merge, or spell each other in a single speech” (253). Furthermore, Genette observes that “the 
hero’s [narrated I] I thought can be written “I understood”...that is, can coincide with the 
narrator’s I know” (254), a feature that is prevalent in the discourse of Shadow. 
           By applying these narratological categories to Shadow I seek to accomplish two 
things. First, I want to illuminate the peculiarities of Severian’s discourse. This seems a 
logical first step when approaching a novel that is so heavily mediated and maintained by a 
narrator. Second, I believe that much of the way myth is constructed in the novel rests on the 
way it is narrated. By subjecting the narrative to the categories of “mood” and “voice”, I will 
identify the discursive sites where myth arises in the final section of the analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simmons 14 
 
   
 
A Note on Myth 
 
This dissertation will submit Shadow to the concept of myth developed by Attebery in 
Strategies of Fantasy. As has already been mentioned, Attebery's claim is that myth functions 
as an undivided perception of phenomena. Attebery traces this through the work of Owen 
Barfield, who argues that language, and thus thought, did not always split things “into 
contrasted pair-the abstract and the concrete” (Barfield 85), but at one time posited the 
“natural symbol and [its] spiritual significance [as] one and the same” (Attebery 119). This 
produced a mythological reckoning of the world. According to Attebery, for example, 
Barfield argued that the word spirit did not denote something that was particularly concrete 
nor abstract but incorporated both. The older conception of spirit “meant something that was 
not exactly “wind” and not exactly “life”” (119). In Shadow, Severian perceives things as if 
they were at the same time scientific and magical. This produces a narrative that is essentially 
mythical, without any explicit contrast between the categories. The novel functions as a kind 
of pure science fantasy. 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simmons 15 
 
   
 
On Mood: A Question of Distance and Perspective 
 
The following analysis will emphasize five settings in Shadow. These consist of the Citadel 
and its necropolis, the Water Way, the Rag Shop, the Botanical Gardens, and The Inn of Lost 
Loves, in whose proximity Severian’s first overt miracle is accomplished. It is not for nothing 
that the chapter names of the Solar Cycle often refer to the material settings in which the 
corresponding action takes place: “The House Azure”, “The Hut in the Jungle”, “The 
Showman’s Tent”, “The Widow’s House”, “The Sand Garden”, and so on. The abundance of 
these headings indicates the importance of place in the development and outcome of 
Severian’s narrative. These settings will be analyzed through the narratological categories 
“mood” and “voice”. The first two sections will be devoted to each respective category: 
“mood”, which involves narrative distance and character focalization; and “voice”, which 
emphasizes “the person who reports it, and, if need be, all those people who participate” 
(Genette 213). The third and final section will argue that these formal narrative features help 
give rise to the mythical texture of the work. 
 
During the opening chapter Severian experiences the rapture of memory: “Every rattling 
chain and whistling wind, every sight, smell, and taste, remains changeless in my mind...I 
remember the feel of my own hands as I rubbed my arms, and the lantern bobbing among the 
steles” (Shadow 4). The narration presents what Gerard Genette deems “mediated intensity”; 
a marked “transgression, a rejection pure and simple...of the millennial opposition between 
diegesis and mimesis” (168). Traditionally, diegetic fiction is not rich in scenic detail. It does 
not seek to produce what Barthes’ calls a realistic effect (“The Reality Effect” 11). As an 
attempt at pure narrative it lacks the intensity of presence found in the referential illusion 
maintained by realist literature7. Diegetic fiction can be viewed as a mode of telling, as 
opposed to the self-emanate showing characteristic of mimetic efforts. The diegetic mode 
presents, as it were, the representation of telling. Mimesis, on the other hand, demands the 
“absence (or minimal presence) of the informer” (Genette 166). A mimetic text seeks to 
evoke a world governed by the senses, hence the emphasis on setting and materiality. A 
mimetic text “shows” by referencing phenomena which can be empirically observed. Norman 
Friedman notes that this is typically done by filtering the action “through the consciousness 
                                                           
7 See Nancy Armstrong’s discussion on literary realism in the introduction to Fiction in the Age of 
Photography (2002), which establishes the argument that the novel is tied to the development of 
photography. 
Simmons 16 
 
   
 
of one of the characters involved...thus avoiding that removal to a distance necessitated by 
retrospective first-person narration” (70). The opposition between diegesis and mimesis 
would then be largely a matter of “distance”. 
          In Narrative Discourse, Genette provisionally states that ““pure narrative” will be 
taken to be more distant than “imitation”: it says less, in a more mediated way” (163; 
original emphasis). “Distance” is the metaphor applied here because the nature of mediation 
is an intervening; the more mediated a narrative, the greater intervention between reader and 
text. This is easily grasped if one considers the transparency of narration in Hemingway’s 
work, which Genette likens to “a recording”, or camera – circumstances are merely given in 
their outward appearance, which entails detail, or quality of scene. The mimetic features draw 
the reader closer to the text because they remove, if not entirely, the medium, the between, 
thus placing them in the scene by way of sensual detail. 
          Shadow works in contrary of this modal opposition. It is a novel simultaneously near 
and far. Severian, like Marcel, is always “present as source, guarantor, and organizer of the 
narrative” (Genette 167), yet at the same time the novel consists almost entirely of scenes in 
the Jamesian sense,8 furnished with all the necessary details that would render them realistic. 
The opening chapter, in which the reader is introduced to the Citadel’s necropolis, illustrates 
this dialectic tension: 
            It is possible I already had some presentiment of my future. The locked and rusted 
gate that stood before us, with wisps of river fog threading its spikes like the mountain 
paths, remains in my mind now as the symbol of my exile. That is why I have begun 
this account of it with the aftermath of our swim, in which I, the torturer’s apprentice 
Severian, had so nearly drowned. (Shadow 1) 
The initial sentence serves to make the reader aware of a kind of dual subjectivity at play in 
the text: “it is possible I already had some presentiment of my future”. This forecasting 
statement produces a split between narrator and protagonist – they are identical, the I of the 
text, but different: the Severian of the past, who might possibly know of his future, and the 
contemporary narrating instance who certainly does. The sentence which follows reverts 
squarely to the narrated I: the reader is beckoned to see the fog-shrouded gate as it once stood 
before the group of adolescent torturers. But this orientation is quickly displaced by the last 
clause, which again establishes distance between the teller and told: it “remains in my mind 
now”. Furthermore, Severian tells the implied reader that he has “begun this account” of his 
                                                           
8 See Genette’s discussion of Henry James’ aesthetics in his chapter on “mood” (168-169).  
Simmons 17 
 
   
 
exile, signaling his writing labor. The last piece of information the paragraph supplies 
contains a curious testament to the inevitable slippage of recollection: “in which I, the 
torturer’s apprentice Severian, had so nearly drowned”. Severian would thus seem to both 
negate and confirm his own subjectivity. This difficulty of addressing a former self 
unconsciously harasses Severian throughout his narrative: the personal memoire effectively 
meditates upon the Other, or has-been.  
          Shadow is decidedly theatrical, both in its treatment of scene and speech. The initial 
chapter is scenic, and pivotal in establishing the subsequent mood and texture of the novel’s 
world. It is also emblematic of the way the world mixes the scientific and the fantastic. 
Severian notes its real antiquity, dating from when the autarchs used the Citadel as their 
stronghold. It is bordered by “the Witch’s Keep, and is separated from the Grand Court” 
(Shadow 10), all stock icons of genre fantasy, though subtly displaced by the admission that 
“the curtain wall our guild was to help defend was ruinous even then...where I used to climb 
the fallen slabs of unsmeltable gray metal” (Shadow 10; emphasis added). The narrator goes 
to mimetic lengths to bring this ancient necropolis about as a segment of his perceived, 
material reality: 
            It was cold and growing colder; we had no light, and the fog had begun to roll in from 
Gyoll in earnest. A few birds had come to roost in the pines and cypresses, and 
flapped uneasily from tree to tree...the fog brought out the smell of the river water in 
my shirt, and the pungency of the new-turned earth. (Shadow 4) 
These environmental details are essentially useless; they have no bearing on the story or its 
eventual outcome. Rather, they are there for the sake of mimesis; to show that Severian’s 
narrative is indeed “governed by “reality,” by the presence of what is there” (Genette 165). 
However, this abundance of narrative information was preceded by Severian stating that: “It 
is my nature, my joy and my curse, to forget nothing. Every rattling chain and whistling 
wind, every sight, smell, and taste, remains changeless in my mind” (Shadow 4). Again, the 
reader is met with the interjection of a narrator who is temporally removed from the event(s) 
he is describing and is at no pains to hide it; quite the contrary, as the act of Severian writing 
his memoir becomes a kind of theme in and of itself. Genette argues that Proust’s quasi-
autobiography does not let the story tell itself, and that “what we are dealing with is not the 
story, but the story’s “image”, its trace in a memory” (168). In the same way, Severian’s 
telling constantly asserts itself as “memory”, which he constantly assures the reader is 
faithful. Even when there is a substantial intensity of detail, the scene is often foreshadowed 
or marked as recollection: there is a constant movement between the modes of showing and 
Simmons 18 
 
   
 
telling, which is a modulation of “distance”. This modulation is also illustrative of a 
subjectivity divided by time. 
          Severian is eventually driven from the Citadel, which up until then was his world 
entire. After helping a “client” take her life, Severian is exiled and given the means to earn 
his bread as “a carnifax, who takes life and performs such excruciations as the judicator there 
decree” (Shadow 106). His first night outside the gates of the Citadel, Severian “threaded the 
narrow streets to the Water Way, which runs with Gyoll” (Shadow 113). About this he writes: 
            Something in me soared, and when the wind whipped my cloak out behind me like 
wings, I felt I might have flown. We are forbidden to smile in the presence of any but 
our masters, brothers, clients, and apprentices. I did not wish to wear my mask, but I 
had to pull up my hood and bow my head lest the passersby see my face. Wrongly I 
thought I would perish on the way, Wrongly I thought I should never return to the 
Citadel and our tower; but wrongly too I believed that there were many more such 
days to come, and I smiled. (Shadow 113) 
The reader is confronted with the reality of Severian’s situation. This excerpt attests to the 
condition of both his physical and psychological being: the whipping of the wind which 
caught his cloak made something inside him soar. The first three lines, taken in isolation, 
would constitute an attempt at realistic representation. But this is quickly effaced by the 
attached clauses which imply the presence of a removed narrator of events. It is a case of the 
narrating instance overriding the focalizing figure; of the contemporary I high-jacking the 
narrative which is presumably centered on his former self. It stresses that what Severian felt 
then is not congruent with the way he feels now, at the time of writing. Exemplified is the 
difference between his former self and the Severian which now relates his story.         
          Another scene which exhibits the contention between showing and telling is when 
Severian first encounters Agia, the young shopkeeper who will be the cause of many trials 
and tribulations throughout his account. While looking for clothing less conspicuous than his 
torturer’s garb, he is distracted from his search by “a slender woman of twenty or a little more 
who came out of one of the dark shops to unfasten the gratings” (Shadow 132).  Struck with a 
feeling that he describes as “love that was deadly and yet not serious” (Shadow 133), he 
hastens to describe her presence which so transfixes him: “She wore a pavonine brocade 
gown of amazing richness and raggedness, and as I watched her, the sun touched a rent just 
below her waist, turning the skin there to the palest gold” (Shadow 133). After some 
consideration, he enters the shop which she and her brother tend, and again sees her coming 
“from one of the dark storerooms at its rear. With her upturned nose and strangely tilted eyes, 
Simmons 19 
 
   
 
she looked so much like her brother I felt sure they were twins, but the slender figure and 
delicate features that seemed incongruent in him were compelling in her” (Shadow 137). The 
reader is once more presented with “superfluous” detail whose main function is mimesis: the 
story could advance accordingly without what Genette describes as these picturesque 
indicators. That she wore a ragged through rich gown, and that she had such and such a nose 
attests to Severian’s perception of things present – “what demands to be “shown”” (Genette 
165). Translated into the mode of pure narrative, or diegesis, the account only needed to 
record what happened: I saw a girl that I greatly desired. I entered the shop and spoke to her 
brother before seeing her again emerge from one of its storerooms. They looked remarkably 
alike; twins in fact. Instead, Severian renders the scene in a way typical of mimesis by 
evoking picturesque, ontic details.  
          This would be in no way unusual if Severian, as the narrator, did not at once interject 
after this series of descriptions. After an exaggerated paragraph break, he writes:  
            Now I begin again. It has been a long time (twice I have heard that guard changed 
outside my study door) since I wrote the lines you read only a moment before. I am 
not certain it is right to record these scenes, which perhaps are important only to me, 
in so much detail. I might easily have condensed everything. (Shadow 137) 
Not only does he flag something for the reader and place emphasis on the activity of writing, 
but even concedes that the way he has just described his first encounter with Agia may be 
wholly unnecessary. Why not condense everything, as he has just stated? Severian complains 
that he has “spent weary days in reading the histories of my predecessors, and they consist of 
little but such accounts” (Shadow 137) but says nothing more about what made them 
wearisome. This could be an instance of Severian reiterating Aristotle’s remark in Poetics 
which Hans-George Gadamer argues implies that “history only relates how things actually 
happened, whereas poetry tells us how things may happen and teaches us to recognize the 
universal in all human action” (13). Ironically, this would contest Severian’s constant 
assurances that his memory records everything as it actually happens. The narrator thus finds 
himself a poet and historian both.  
          The case could also be made that Gene Wolfe speaks to the modern reader here, 
addressing our insatiable appetite for the real. Genette addresses the issue of the mimetic 
function, explaining:  
            It goes without saying, for example, that the same text can be received by one reader 
as intensely mimetic and by another as only slightly “expressive”... [the audience for 
Simmons 20 
 
   
 
the classics] would undoubtedly have found the so richly and minutely described 
accounts in the naturalistic novel to be only chaotic proliferation. (166) 
Could one hardly expect that Severian’s hypothetical audience, so far removed in the future, 
would have had the same expectation for detail? However the case, it can be argued that the 
reader now experiences the text at a triple remove.  
          But this “distance” caused by Severian’s authorial interjection is only momentary. The 
reader is brought back into the thick of things when the scene is again furnished: “However 
that may be, I let the shopkeeper’s sister help me adjust the mantle. It could be drawn tightly 
about the neck, and when it was worn so, my fuligin cloak was invisible beneath it” (Shadow 
139) 
          After their meeting at the shop, Agia convinces Severian to accompany her to The 
Botanic Gardens of Nessus (the major metropolis of Urth) in order to cut an avern9, which 
will act as a weapon in his upcoming duel with the mysterious hipparch. The Botanic 
Gardens turns out to be one of the most disorienting scenes in The Book of the New Sun. In 
the garden’s rooms “the Autarch wants some people to remain [in order to] accent the reality 
of the scene” and where “his archimage, Father Inire, has invested them with a conjuration” 
(Shadow 156). Severian finds himself overwhelmed in these rooms, or mini environs, and 
meets many a strange and miraculous sight: 
            For some time we rowed in silence; I saw geese, alive and content for all I could tell, 
bobbing a long way off; and once, like something in a dream, the nearly human face 
of a manatee looking into my own through a few spans of brownish water. Beside me, 
Dorcas plucked a water hyacinth and put it in her hair. Except for the vague spot of 
white on the bank some distance ahead, it was the first flower I had seen in the 
Garden of Endless Sleep. (Shadow 186-187) 
This descriptive effort places the reader in the scene, almost as if he or she were seeing the 
world through Severian’s eyes or perceiving it through his senses. The world the text erects is 
self-immanent, despite the use of the pronoun I and the narrative distance it entails. 
Essentially, the world shows up as something to be sensed. The narrator then disrupts the 
reading:  
            Is it possible the flower came into being only because Dorcas reached for it? In 
daylight moments, I know as well as the next that such things are impossible; but I am 
                                                           
9 “An artichoke-like plant of extraterrestrial origin, grown in the Botanical Gardens of Nessus, and 
used as a lethal weapon by duelists on the Sanguinary Field.” (Andre-Driussi 39) 
Simmons 21 
 
   
 
writing by night, and then, when I sat in that boat with the hyacinth less than a cubit 
from my eyes, I wondered at the dim light. (Shadow 187) 
Once more, this attests to the plural subjectivity found in the novel. In this case there are two 
Severians performing the act of wondering: the Severian who wonders how the flower came 
into being, and the Severian who “wondered at the dim light”. These interjections come as 
unexpected ruptures in the telling, so that the reader is caught between two modes: one that is 
distant, and one that encourages the immediacy common to mimesis. 
         To begin the chapter titled “The Inn of the Lost Loves”, Severian foregrounds his 
descriptive process by affirming this dissertation’s concentration on scene: “It has been my 
good fortune – or even fortune, as I may be – that the places with which my life has been 
largely associated have been, with very few exceptions, of the most permanent character” 
(Shadow 195). Not only does this emphasize the scenic quality of the chapter to follow, but 
again signals the narrating presence; the mature Severian whose nature is different from that 
of the character the reader follows. Nevertheless, both appear entangled in scenes. The 
temporal divide between the two ‘subjects’ is pronounced when he writes: 
            I might tomorrow, if I wished, return to the Citadel and (I think) to the very cot on 
which I slept as an apprentice. Gyoll still rolls past my city of Nessus; the Botanic 
Gardens still glitter in the sun, faceted with those strange enclosures wherein a single 
mood is preserved for all time.  (Shadow 195; emphasis added) 
This passage effectively signals what is at stake at this stage in the analysis. Namely, the idea 
of subjectivity dispersed across time and space (“distance”). 
          
Shadow is narrated by Severian, the novel’s hero and central protagonist. The reader rarely, if 
ever, leaves his point-of- view. Severian never disappears as character or narrator, and the 
events which make up Shadow and the entire The Book of the New Sun revolve around his I 
like constellations. Gerard Genette calls this a “restriction of field” (189), or “the question 
[of] who sees” (186).  The question may be better formulated as who perceives. As Roman 
Ingarden argues: 
            If, in our reading, we want to apprehend the world exactly as it is represented, we 
must, so to speak, fictitiously transpose ourselves into the presented center of 
orientation and wander about in the represented world in fictione with the given 
person. (231) 
But what the person apprehends around them the fictive world is not limited to sight data 
alone. It is sometimes given to the whole apparatus of their perception. For example, when 
Simmons 22 
 
   
 
Severian describes the opening episode in the necropolis, he “felt” it was growing colder. He 
could “hear” a few birds flapping uneasily in the trees, and he could “smell” the river water in 
his shirt. Everything is related to the narrative’s center of orientation through what he 
perceives sensually around him. It is through this process that the reader forgets their own 
orientation and replaces it with a character’s or narrator’s; they step into the story. The reader 
transposes themselves. 
          Since the narrator and protagonist in Shadow are the same entity, the problem of 
focalization would at first seem minimal. Much of the novel seems focalized through the 
perceptions of the protagonist Severian (the narrated I), though Genette rightly claims that 
“the “autobiographical” type of narrator, whether we are dealing with a real or a fictive 
autobiography, is – by the very fact of his oneness with the hero – more “naturally” 
authorized to speak in his own name” (198). It sometimes becomes unclear which Severian is 
acting as the focalizer, whether it is the narrating I or the narrated I. This phenomenon is not 
always announced; on the contrary, at times the reader is only able to determine which 
Severian perceives with respect to the knowledge he purports. Autobiographical fiction, 
according to Genette, does not have to respect the ignorance of its cast; “the autobiographical 
narrator, having no obligation of discretion with respect to himself, does not have this kind of 
reason to impose silence on himself” (198). Nevertheless, for the most part Severian places a 
kind of restriction on himself. The suspense of the narrative is upheld largely by the 
limitation of the hero’s knowledge.  
          Returning to the opening scene in the necropolis, which for Severian had “never 
seemed a city of death” (Shadow 15), there is a passage which neatly illustrates the issue of 
dual focalization. Severian relates that “the men had no armor, as I could soon see by the 
sickly yellow light of the lanterns; but they had pikes, as Drotte had said, and staves and 
hatchets” (Shadow 2). This is clearly a case of the action being filtered through the perception 
of the narrated Severian. The reader is orientated by what Severian witnesses, and the 
particulars of the approaching militiamen are brought about almost as if he or she (the reader) 
were perceiving them. This is what Jean Pouillon describes as “vision from behind” (22). The 
represented world is given to the reader as if he or she were looking over the shoulder, or 
through the eyes, of the focalizer. What makes this instance confounding is that the narrator 
foreshadows these mimetic effects by writing: 
            In the recesses of my mind we stand shivering there even now. Just as all that appears 
imperishable tends towards its own destruction, those moments that at the time seem 
the most fleeting recreate themselves – not only in my memory (which in the final 
Simmons 23 
 
   
 
accounting loses nothing) but in the throbbing of my heart and the prickling of my 
hair, making themselves new just as our Commonwealth reconstitutes itself each 
morning in the shrill tones of its own clarions. (Shadow 2) 
This passage presents a clear case of dual focalization. The scene is made anew by the trace 
of its memory; it is what the hero presumably apprehended all those years ago, but the 
narrating source recreates the event from memory. At the time, the hero’s apprehension of 
those moments appeared fleeting, but now, at the time of writing recreate themselves 
perfectly. The scene is focalized somewhere between who speaks and who perceives, in the 
space of recollection which marries both. 
          Later during the necropolis episode, Severian fatefully intervenes in a skirmish that 
takes place between the militiamen and a trio of grave robbers. Now in fixed internal 
focalization through the hero, Severian describes his predicament: “All this took place in dark 
and fog. I saw it, but for the most part the men were no more than ambient shadows – as the 
woman with the heart – shaped face had been. Yet something touched me. Perhaps it was 
Vodalus’s willingness to die” (Shadow 7). In the very same paragraph, the focalization then 
reverts to Severian the narrator, when he stalls the action to muse on its lingering 
psychological effect: 
            Many times since then, when I have stood upon a shaky platform in some market-
town square with Terminus Est [Severian’s carnificial sword] at rest before me and a 
miserable vagrant kneeling at my feet...I have recalled Vodalus at the graveside, and 
raised my own blade half pretending that when it fell I would be striking for him. 
(Shadow 7) 
This interjection shifts the focalization away from the hero who is in the act of saving 
Vodalus, who felt in that instant that his “whole life teetered in the scales with his” (Shadow 
7). Focalization is thus driven through the narrator and presented as an image of recollection. 
The above passage illustrates what Genette calls an advance notice, and “such notification 
cannot be the hero’s doing, but must of course be the narrator’s” (205). The Severian who 
wrestles with the militiamen cannot possibly have knowledge of how this scene will later 
affect him, or that he would eventually be forced to make his living by performing executions 
in market-towns. If the reader indeed perceives the vagrant kneeling before this future 
Severian, it is through the focalizing perspective of the narrating I.  
          After having taken leave of Master Palaemon and the universe he has known since 
birth, Severian makes his way to the Water Way, where to ask for hospitality in one of the 
Simmons 24 
 
   
 
decrepit buildings lining it “would have been an invitation to death” (Shadow 113). Now 
fixed on the internal perception of the narrated Severian, the passage reads: 
           With the broad blade slung behind my left shoulder, I made my way through the 
corpse door and out into the windy garden of the necropolis. The sentry at the lowest 
gate, nearest the river, allowed me to pass without challenge, through with many a 
strange look, and I threaded the narrow streets to the Water Way, that runs with Gyoll. 
(Shadow 113) 
The reader follows the hero Severian into the heart of the vast city of Nessus. Aside from the 
I which signals the act of telling, the narrator disappears in this passage. One could merely 
replace the I with he to produce an analytic internal observation of events. The contemporary 
narrating Severian is thoroughly dissolved in the action of the hero-protagonist. What is 
recorded in the next paragraph is more problematic, as it is difficult to determine just whose 
feelings they are when Severian writes that the “watches of that afternoon were the happiest 
of my life” (Shadow 113). Is it the narrating Severian who feels the joy of recollection, or the 
narrated hero who once traversed these destitute avenues in route to his destiny? Or do the 
subjects converge here? 
         Severian’s confession that: “Now I must write something that still shames me, even 
after all that has occurred. The watches of that afternoon were the happiest of my life” 
(Shadow 113) is a key feature of this passage. That it still shames him testifies to the fact that 
both the hero and the narrator felt and feel something akin to shame despite themselves, 
though its source may be not be the same. But the next line clearly turns focalization back to 
the narrator, to the Severian of long ago, who surely could not have known in advance that 
these moments would be the happiest of his life. In fact, he later remarks about the same 
occasion that “wrongly...I believed that there were many more such days to come, and I 
smiled” (Shadow 113). This last statement contains an especially curious instance of dual 
focalization, as it expresses the mindset of both the hero and the narrator simultaneously. The 
hero Severian believed that the happiness he felt would last so long as he was footloose, but it 
is at the same time considered anew by the narrating Severian: “wrongly I believed”. The 
memory thus shows up to the reader at a double remove -- it is remediated by the narrating I. 
          In chapter XVI, “The Rag Shop”, Severian attempts to disguise his ominous profession 
by purchasing a “voluminous mantle of some cheap stuff” (Shadow 132) that could be worn 
over his guild’s habit. In many shop windows Severian sees “saddle blankets, saddles with 
armored pommels to protect the loins, red forage caps, long-shafted khetens, fans of silver for 
signaling, bows curved and recurved for the use by cavalry” (Shadow 132) and so on. Before 
Simmons 25 
 
   
 
listing these items, Severian writes “though I knew nothing of it at the time, thousands of 
mercenaries were outfitting themselves for the summer campaign” (Shadow 132). Which 
Severian is seeing these items, the hero or the narrator? Could the green Severian, who had 
until then spent his existence in the Matachin Tower, possibly know that the “fans of silver” 
had some military function? Or that the “bows curved and recurved” were used exclusively 
by cavalry regiments? Any who have read the entirety of The Book of the New Sun knows 
that Severian later partakes in the campaign he alludes to here. Though even in The Sword of 
the Lictor, whose events are months removed from this scene, Severian confesses that “I had 
never so much as seen a battle, much less taken part in one” (254). Thus, the hero Severian 
may have seen the silver fans in the window, but the narrator properly names them. The hero 
Severian looked at the bows, but the narrator places them into a context. In this circumstance, 
it is the narrator who is clearly representing them as memory compounded by lived 
experience. It is as if the image of Severian looking in storefronts is driven through two 
consciousnesses. This is an example of how the narrative is often at the same time immediate 
and highly mediated.  
          After purchasing an appropriate mantle to conceal his identity, Severian writes that he: 
            let the shopkeeper’s sister help me adjust the mantle. It could be drawn tightly about 
the neck, and when it was worn so, my fuligin cloak was invisible beneath it. Still 
without revealing myself, I could reach through the front or through the slits at the 
sides. I unfastened Terminus Est from her baldric and carried her like a staff for as 
long as I wore that mantle. (Shadow 139) 
One is with Severian the protagonist when he practices cinching the mantle at the neck. At 
least it initially seems that way. But the last line causes a minor displacement which invites a 
reassessment of this entire scene: he “carried her like a staff for as long as [he] wore the 
mantle”, an observation that the hero could not have made at the time. That these words refer 
to a memory, and not a present act, reasserts itself through commentary only the narrating I is 
privy to. And it is not only that. The reader is shown the memory. It is a matter of the present 
showing us the past. 
          In confessing his ambivalent feelings towards the shopkeeper’s sister Agia, Severian 
explains: “I have already told how strongly I desired Agia. When we are talking to women, 
we talk as though love and desire are two separate entities; and women, who often love us 
and sometimes desire us, maintain the same fiction” (Shadow 208). Not only does the 
statement “I have already told” signal the act of narrating, thus producing a “distance”, but it 
additionally causes the sentences which follow to point to the psychology of the narrator, not 
Simmons 26 
 
   
 
the hero in the moment he sees Agia coming down the steps carrying his avern “which 
seemed to [him] to have grown larger in the failing light” (Shadow 208). The focalization 
through the narrator continues when he muses, “but no one can say from what it is that what 
we call (almost at our pleasure) love or desire is born” (Shadow 208) before reverting to fixed 
internal focalization, where the hero Severian perceives “Agia...[coming] down the stair, one 
side of her face was lit by the last light of day, and the other thrown into shadow; her skirt, 
split nearly to the waist, permitted a flash of silken thigh” (Shadow 209). A few lines later, it 
is as if Severian intends to excuse his authorial interjections by claiming that “I understood 
all this” (Shadow 209). This confession would imply that he may have intuitively or vaguely 
grasped this conflict between love and desire, but it is only the narrating I, Severian the 
Lame, who can put it into words and express it as such. 
          In the Botanic Gardens, there are several events which highlight this phenomenon. 
Upon entering the room labeled Jungle Garden, Severian explains: 
            Even now, as I sit at my writing table in the House Absolute, some distant noise 
brings back to my ears the screams of the magenta-breasted, cynaeous-backed parrot 
that flapped from tree to tree, watching us with white-rimmed and disapproving eyes-
though this is no doubt because my mind was already turned to that haunted place. 
(Shadow 158) 
The reader is both with Severian the hero as he enters the strange structure, and with the 
narrator who recalls the event. One visualizes the scene as if he or she were striding alongside 
Severian, but it is marked as a recollection: “as I sit at my writing table”. The focalization is 
essentially through the narrating I in his act of remembrance. There is a noise about the 
narrator which merely recalls the screams of the parrot and the situation of the hero long ago. 
This is an extreme case of both showing and telling, where speaker and perceiver nearly 
converge through a single focalizing lens. 
           The scenes selected highlight how distance and focalization are both important 
elements in the narrative of Shadow.  Distance, as was shown, “can furnish the reader with 
more or fewer details, and in a more or less direct way” (Genette 162). At times the novel is 
very direct, and the scenes are rendered in a purely mimetic mode with all the attendant 
details one would expect from a realist novel. In fact, it is nearly as if Wolfe “insists that the 
world be treated as character” (Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction 8), a decision 
symptomatic of SF at large, where description stands in for characterization. But this is not 
entirely the case, as the narrator’s intensity of presence constantly makes itself known in 
order to disrupt the illusion of mimesis. The way Shadow is told sometimes imposes a 
Simmons 27 
 
   
 
“distance” between itself and the apprehending party, so that what the reader experiences is 
less direct: that the story is mediated becomes a theme in and of itself.  
          Likewise, the conflict between focalizers affects the way in which narrative 
information is conveyed. The two instances of Severian have differing capacities of 
knowledge. The reader aligns these two different viewpoints, which at times seem to coincide 
and become one, as when Severian sees Agia approaching with the ominous avern, though 
the recollected vision is obviously colored by the present musings of the narrator in 
retrospect. Genette uses the activity of viewing a picture to succinctly grasp this: “the view I 
have of a picture depends...on the distance separating me from it [more or less mediation], 
and...on my position with respect to whatever partial obstruction is more or less blocking it 
[who sees]” (162). The reader’s access to the text, and the mood which it invokes, is 
dependent on both distance and perspective. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simmons 28 
 
   
 
On Voice: A Question of Time, Levels, and Person 
 
It is not unusual for readers to say that a text speaks to them.10 A text can have a certain style, 
a particular “voice”. In narratology, the category of ‘voice’ examines the type of discourse 
employed by the narrator. The type of discourse a narrator employs, and the way it is 
implicated in the diegesis, affects the way a reader receives, or hears a text. Genette is quick 
to assert that this linguistic metaphor “should not be taken too literally” (30), though the 
connection is easy enough to make. Essentially, ‘voice’ concerns the narrating instance – the 
place from which speech issues. It is the narrator a reader hears, so to say.  
          For the purposes of this dissertation, the narrative discourse that is Shadow was not 
issued by Gene Wolfe, only translated by him. The G.W. which signs the appendixes is a 
kind of extra-diegetic level beyond the scope of this paper. Rather it is the autarch Severian – 
or the different Is of the text. This person who narrates a fictive account is always itself 
fictive, “even if assumed directly by the author” (Genette 213). As Genette later says, “it is 
this narrating instance that we have...to look at, according to the traces it has left” (214).          
          In his chapter devoted to “voice”, Genette reasons that “the importance or the relevance 
of these implications [considerations of voice] is essentially variable” (212). The very first 
paragraph of Shadow draws the reader’s attention to who is narrating the story. This I who 
narrates in the subsequent is a constant figure of interest to the reader throughout the course 
of the novel. Severian’s “voice” will be explored through the categories of “time of 
narrating”, “narrative level”, and “person”. These categories will be loosely applied to the 
same five scenes reviewed in the previous section. 
 
Shadow is told in the past tense, making it an act of “subsequent narration”.11 Aside from 
what the verb tenses indicate, the first sentence of the novel reveals that it is the past the 
narrator speaks of: “It is possible I already had some presentiment of my future” (Shadow 1; 
emphasis added). Not only is the narrating presence made immediately explicit, but so is the 
temporal dimension of that presence. The relationship between the time of narrating and the 
time of narration itself immediately becomes a concern.  
          The necropolis scene is the most temporally distant from the time of narrating. 
Severian writes that his companion Eata “indicated the thousands of paces of wall stretching 
across the slum and sweeping up the hill until at last they met the high curtain wall of the 
                                                           
10 See Gadamar on play in The Relevance of the Beautiful (22-15) 
11 See Genette on voice in Narrative Discourse (212-220) 
Simmons 29 
 
   
 
Citadel. It was a walk I would take, much later” (Shadow 1). The reader experiences this 
“walk” at a later point in the novel, but the episode in the necropolis is the oldest memory of 
Severian’s to which he or she are privy, as he begins his account with it in “the aftermath of 
our swim, in which I, the torturer’s apprentice Severian, had so nearly drowned” (Shadow 1). 
Unlike some forms of autobiographical fiction, where there is “a relative contemporaneity of 
story time and narrative time” (Genette 220), from the outset Severian’s tale contains 
indicators, punctuated here and there, which remind the reader of the time separating story 
and narrative. It is true, as Genette asserts, that “the very length of the story gradually lessens 
the interval separating it from the moment of the narrating” (221) until there is a final 
convergence. The reader witnesses this at the close of the New Sun tetralogy, where he or she 
is told: 
            Here my pen shall halt, reader, though I do not. I have carried you from gate to gate-
from the locked and fog-shrouded gate of the necropolis of Nessus to that cloud-
racked gate we call the sky, the gate that shall lead me, as I hope, beyond the nearest 
stars. My pen halts, though I do not. Reader, you will walk no more with me. It is 
time we both take up our lives. (Sword & Citadel 611) 
Here, hero and narrator merge into one instance, the space separating the two demolished 
more and more with each page turned. There is a similar form of closure to Shadow, though it 
does not offer the same kind of convergence that the final scene of the tetralogy does. The 
time elapsed between the told and the telling is far more indeterminate in Shadow. On its 
final page Severian remarks: “Here I pause, having carried you, reader...from the locked and 
fog-shrouded gate of our necropolis to this gate with its curling wisps of smoke” (274). This 
second gate, while closer temporally to the narrating instant, is not a convergence: much 
remains to be told, as Severian’s memoir attests to: “when I entered this second gate, I began 
to walk a new road. From that great gate forward, for a long time, it was to lie outside the 
City Imperishable” (Shadow 274; emphasis added).  
          The necropolis marks the beginning of Severian’s journey. This scene contains several 
clauses which indicate how time has elapsed between the two gates, as previously shown, but 
the final sentence of the chapter poignantly reminds the reader of this: “It was in this fashion 
that I began the long journey by which I have backed into the throne” (Shadow 9). This 
evokes a segment of space between the acts narrated and the instance of Severian writing 
about them.  
          Similarly, most scenes contain some mark which makes evident this temporal interval. 
For example, during Severian’s walk along the Water Way, a destitute district of Nessus, he 
Simmons 30 
 
   
 
confides: “Now I must write something that still shames me, even after all that has occurred” 
(Shadow 113). Not only does this signal an extended interval of time between the events and 
the act of writing, but it also suggests an abundance of drama in that temporal gap. Genette 
argues that “this temporal interval, and what fills it up and gives it life, is an essential element 
in the narrative’s significance” (216). Genette is speaking of Proust’s Recherche du temps 
perdu, but these temporal markers play a remarkable similar role in Severian’s narrative. 
They constantly foreshadow the moments of consequence to follow and lend the narrative a 
degree of urgency it would not otherwise possess. It also indicates that it is not now in the 
diegetic, but in its future that the major drama occurs: “even after all that has occurred”. 
          Nevertheless, the “act of narrating” seems to obscure its own temporal dimension. This 
is not related to the amount of time that elapses between the moment Severian apprehends the 
fog-shrouded gate and the moment he commits it to paper, but to the actual time which 
elapses while Severian writes the account. As Genette notes, “narrating involves an 
instantaneous action, without temporal dimension. Sometimes it is dated, but it is never 
measured” (222). In The Rag Shop scene, the narrative pauses when Severian seemingly rests 
his pen to meditate on what he has just recorded of his uncanny encounter with Agia and her 
brother, the corpse-like shopkeeper, “Now I begin again. It has been a long time (twice I have 
heard the guard changed outside my study door) since I wrote the lines you read only a 
moment before” (Shadow 137). Thus, Severian addresses the time in which he broke from 
writing his account, but the actual process of writing Shadow is never explicitly measured. It 
is as Genette reminds one, typical of the subsequent first-person narrative: “it possesses at the 
same time a temporal situation (with respect to the past story) and an atemporal essence 
(since it has no duration proper)” (223). Severian may have labored years to produce his 
manuscript, or it could have taken just the amount of time it takes to read it – a matter of 
hours.  
          This sense of atemporality is more pronounced in The Shadow of the Torturer due to its 
general emphasis on the mimetic. When the narrative shifts its focus to the actions and 
dialogue in the episodes it recounts, the text appears self-immanent, reminiscent of the 
subsequently told “third-person” novel, where “the preterite marks[s] a sort of ageless past” 
(Genette 220) and obscures the source of narration. So, even though the narrative is written in 
the past tense, the events which unfold happen in an indeterminate past that appears nearly 
like the present. The Botanic Gardens scene illustrates this ever-presentness of the action, 
where the narrating presence is unusually subdued, and the floor given to Severian the 
protagonist and his companions: 
Simmons 31 
 
   
 
            We entered, and in so doing stepped into such silence as must have been in the 
morning of the world, before the fathers of men first hammered out brazen gongs, 
built squealing cartwheels, and splashed Gyoll with striding oars. The air was 
fragrant, damp, and a trifle warmer than it had been outside. The walls to either side 
of the tessellated floor were also of glass, but so thick that sight could scarcely 
penetrate them; leaves and flowers and even soaring trees seen through these walls 
wavered as though glimpsed through water. On one broad door I read: THE 
GARDEN OF SLEEP. (Shadow 154) 
This example, like most of the sentences which comprise Shadow, involve an “instantaneous 
action”; they are neither dated nor measured. The duration of the narrating act is never a 
concern for its readers. Its episodes (and it is a highly episodic novel), are like “minute[s] 
freed from the order of time” (Genette 223). As it pertains to the “time of narrating” in the 
novel, it is only important to know roughly how much time elapses between the necropolis 
scene and the moment when it is evoked: “It was cold and growing colder; we had no light, 
and fog had begun to roll in from Gyoll in earnest…” (Shadow 4). It is in this interval that the 
drama of memory unfolds. 
 
The location where Severian composes his autobiography is not merely decorative in 
Shadow. Indeed, the location of Severian at the time of his narrating significantly affects the 
way the reader receives the events it records. Genette claims that “the narrating place is very 
rarely specified, and is almost never relevant”, and furthermore, that “we scarcely think of 
worrying about it” (216). But this is not really the case in Shadow, where the location in 
which Severian narrates is explicitly given on several occasions, and the fact that it is there, 
in the remarkable confines of the House Absolute that he takes up the quill adds varying 
significance to the episodes he relates. It also contributes to the difference between Severian’s 
two selves: not only are they divided by time, but their stature as well, for the House 
Absolute is the seat and home of the Autarch, the commonwealth’s ruler. This dissertation 
argues that it is just as important to know where Severian writes as it is to know how much 
time has elapsed between the moment of narration and the events narrated.   
          It is easy to claim that what explicitly happens in the novel, from the activities 
recounted in the necropolis all the way up to Severian’s encounter with the great wall of 
Nessus, plus the representation of Severian writing about them, is inside the narrative. As has 
already been illustrated, these two instances are thematically different. This is what Genette 
defines as a “difference of level” (228). Likewise, the situation of Gene Wolfe producing the 
Simmons 32 
 
   
 
fictive memoir of Severian is what can be described as an extradiegetic, or a third level: one 
truly outside of the narrative proper. This is the literary instance, as opposed to the 
composition one attributes to Severian, which is the narrating instance. Thus, Shadow 
contains three discernable levels to investigate. The first is the diegetic or intradiegetic act of 
Severian penning his account. The second is the metadiegetic aspect, which are the events 
accounted (the story), and the third level is the presence of Wolfe himself as author, or in the 
case of Shadow, its translator - the extradiegetic factor.  
          The metadiegetic elements of a narrative are often associated with stories told within 
the ‘main’ story, such as dreamscapes, hallucinations, or memorial episodes. The story of 
Severian’s journey from tower to wall at first appears to be the main story – the intradiegetic 
one. Nevertheless, the present situation of Severian, at the moment of his writing in the 
House Absolute whilst waiting to embark on “one of the huge spaceships of the alien 
Hierodules to travel across time and space...to become the legendary New Sun” (The Urth of 
the New Sun 1) is actually the story, the intradiegetic thread. All the objects and persons the 
reader encounters across its many pages merely confer an explanatory function of this event. 
As Genette writes, “all these narratives [the metadiegesis] answer, explicitly or not, a 
question of the type “What events have led to the present situation?”” (232). 
          The first scene notably heralds this kind of explanatory function which the 
metadiegesis serves. When Severian closes the chapter with “It was in this fashion that I 
began the long journey by which I have backed into the throne” (Shadow 9) it marks the 
forthcoming account as one long extended answer to the question of just how he arrived at 
the threshold of martyrdom.  
          Taking the episode at the Inn of Lost Loves and the combat which unfolds on the 
adjacent Sanguinary Field as an example, it can be illustrated just how the metadiegesis 
confers an explanatory function on the intradiegesis. The reader is already aware that certain 
parts of the averns with which the contestants duel are fatal if touched. Before Severian 
carefully plucks his weapon in The Garden of Endless Sleep, the narrator informs the reader: 
“Whether the avern is deadly to the life of its own world I have no way of knowing. It may be 
that it is not, that it is only dangerous to us by reason of a nature accidentally inimical to our 
own” (Shadow 190). When Severian meets the Septentrion, a kind of decorated soldier, at the 
appointed place and hour to settle a score, it is presumably to the death.  
          Having been hit by one of the avern leaves thrown by his opponent, Severian drops to 
the ground and proceeds to give an account of the miracle that follows: 
Simmons 33 
 
   
 
            The peal of a carillon. The colors, which I had taken to be those of the struggling 
leaves, were in the sky instead, where a rainbow unrolled beneath the aurora. The 
world was a great paschal egg, crowed with all the colors of the palette. Near my head 
a voice inquired, “Is he dead?” and someone answered matter-of-factly, “That’s it. 
Those things always kill. Unless you want to see them drag him off?”. (Shadow 214) 
The impossible happens. Instead of perishing, as all the gathered spectators expect, Severian 
“drew breath to ask what had happened, and something fell from my chest to my lap; it was a 
leaf with a bloodstained tip” (Shadow 215). While the parallels to the resurrection of Christ 
are obvious, this scene explains and gives credence to the narrator’s current, intradiegetic role 
as the New Sun. This miraculous feat, coupled with others that pepper the narrative, 
contributes to his legitimacy and explains his status. This legitimacy is what lands him on the 
throne and sets him on his eventual journey beyond our stars: the real, diegetic narrative of 
which Shadow is a mere pretext. All the happenings which occur in the metadiegetic, to a 
more or lesser degree, influence the intradiegetic situation. This may be the main thrust of 
Severian’s labor, for as he states in the beginning of The Urth of the New Sun, “Let me 
describe then, to no one and nothing, just who I am and what it is that I have done to Urth” 
(1). Severian’s recourse is memory; which has “always appeared with the intensity, almost, of 
hallucinations” (Sword & Citadel 451).  
        A detail that is worth exploring briefly is the representation of the extradiegetic 
personality which closes Shadow. While this narrative level is not made explicit in any of the 
scenes which this analysis highlights, it in some ways frames the metadiegetic and 
intradiegetic elements of the novel. For example, after Severian writes, “Here I pause. If you 
wish to walk no farther with me, reader, I cannot blame you. It is no easy road” (Shadow 
274), there comes a section titled Appendix: A Note on the Translation. This is signed G.W. 
(Gene Wolfe) and says things such as, “In rendering this book – originally composed in a 
tongue that has not yet achieved existence – into English, I might easily have saved myself a 
great deal of labor by having recourse to invented terms” and “Latin is once or twice 
employed to indicate inscriptions and the like are in a language Severian appears to consider 
obsolete” (Shadow 276). This section introduces a third level of narration by which the other 
two are made subordinate. Here, the text addresses an actual reading public, contrasted with 
the imagined readership which Severian envisions when he writes: “The Sanguinary Field, of 
which all my readers will have heard, though some, I hope, will never have visited it” 
(Shadow 210). Thus, the primary level of narration (the productive efforts of the living 
author) is juxtaposed with the two secondary, fictive levels. This places the reader at a double 
Simmons 34 
 
   
 
remove from the metadiegesis, marking another case of “distancing” which occurs amidst 
what is otherwise a heavily mimetic, intimate novel.  
 
Under the heading “person”, Genette makes it clear that “the novelist’s choice, unlike the 
narrator’s, is not between two grammatical forms, but between two narrative postures” (244). 
Simply put, a narrative can be told by a character within the story, or some presence without, 
such as in Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter (1850), where the narrator pieces 
together the story through the study of historical documents and hearsay. Both these postures 
can potentially be told in the first-person (grammatical form) but “refer to two very different 
situations” (Genette 244) at the level of analysis. 
          The I which speaks in Shadow obviously does not refer to Gene Wolfe, even ignoring 
the absurdities entailed given that it is supposedly set thousands of years in earth’s future. 
Severian as narrator is introduced immediately and nothing is ever leveled against his initial 
claim as author: it is an autodiegetic narrative. To again quote Genette, “absence is absolute, 
but presence has degrees” (245). The presence of Severian in Shadow is immense; it is 
evident to the outmost degree. Unlike other famous narrators, such as John H. Watson, who 
tells the escapades of Sherlock Holmes but sometimes leaves the diegetic universe 
completely, Severian is always there. This is the case even when he listens to “third-degree 
narratives” told by other characters. They are always for the benefit of his ears, and their 
contents are always pertinent to his own quest of self-discovery. One could say it is the most 
self-absorbed of novels. 
          It is here, regarding “person”, that the reader encounters some of the difficulties 
associated with the focalized in autobiographical fiction. Genette speaks of this difficulty in A 
la recherche du temps perdu, where “narrative content...widely overflows the hero’s inner 
experience and at times requires a quasi-” omniscient” narrator” (251). This phenomenon was 
witnessed when examining the two different focalizing agents in Shadow.  
     The discourse of Shadow is stricter in this regard than Proust’s A la recherche du temps 
perdu, which needed “an “omniscient” narrator capable of dominating a moral experience 
which is now objectivized” (Genette 252), or one who could occasionally access the minds of 
other characters. Conversely, Severian is careful to mark the occasions which border on the 
omniscient with words like “must”, “seeming”, or “perhaps”. These work to make such 
instances mere conjectures of what others must be feeling or thinking. For example, when 
Severian and Agia approach the steps which lead to the Botanic Gardens he receives “a 
startled glance from a woman carrying a dulcimer [which] told me the mantle I had bought 
Simmons 35 
 
   
 
from Agia’s brother was in disarray, permitting the fuligin of my guild cloak (which must 
have looked like mere empty darkness to the poor woman) to be seen” (Shadow 150; 
emphasis added). In this example the reader is never permitted access to the “old woman”, 
but only Severian’s own estimation of what caused the expression on her face.  
          Shortly after this, Severian takes the opportunity to appraise his companion, who, like 
every woman he seems to encounter, is desired: 
            Agia’s face was far from perfect now in the clear sunshine, but she had nothing to fear 
from it. My hunger fed at least as ravenously upon her imperfections. She possessed 
the hopeful, hopeless courage of the poor, which is perhaps the most appealing of all 
human qualities; and I rejoiced in the flaws that made her more real to me. (Shadow 
151) 
At this point in the narrative, it is odd that Severian would know anything about Agia, 
especially if she was courageous or not. Furthermore, by stating that she “possessed” those 
qualities is to insinuate that she embodied them; to talk of the qualities that one embodies is a 
hallmark trait of the omniscient narrator. Nevertheless, is this only another case of a shift in 
focalization? With all that Severian comes to know of Agia throughout The Book of the New 
Sun it is safe to say that he could make such an observation without “accessing” her mind. 
Her actions come to speak of her courage, and her hopefulness or lack thereof. It is a case of 
the narrating presence interjecting itself into the situation of the hero. 
          In The Garden of Sleep the reader comes as close as they ever will to experiencing an 
omniscient narrating source. When trying to remain in this enclosure, Severian draws the ire 
of Agia which he expresses thus: 
            For an instant I saw a flash of anger in her face. Then it was spread over with an 
unction of philosophical irony, the secretion of her injured self-esteem. I was far 
stronger than she, and poor though I was, richer; she told herself now (I felt I could 
almost hear her voice whispering in her own ear) that by accepting such insults she 
mastered me. (Shadow 156) 
“She told herself now” is a clear indication that the reader has now left the “person” of 
Severian for another; he or she is inside Agia and with her thoughts of mastery. But this 
transgression is underscored when Severian mentions in parenthesis that he “could almost 
hear her voice”. Consequently, the reader does not hear the interior ruminations of Agia but is 
still grounded in Severian’s own observations of what she must be thinking. It is a situation 
of extreme intuition on part of the narrator, rather than a transgression of rules. 
Simmons 36 
 
   
 
          Severian often prefaces his explanations of how another character in the narrative feels 
or thinks by referring to his own perception of things. When he and Agia come upon a 
mysterious hut in the Jungle Garden, he explains that “the man we had seen from the path 
stood at the window opposite the door, looking out” and that he “felt that he knew we had 
come...but that he wished to pretend he did not. There is something in the line of the back 
when a man turns so as not to see, and it was evident in his” (Shadow 167).  In this instance, 
the reader is not granted access to the perceptions of the “man”, but the text is again, as is 
always the case, meditated through Severian’s seeing. That the man was in a state of pretense 
is given to Severian having read outward signs, as an augur of the Long Sun whorl might read 
the entrails of a sacrifice for unseen portents.  
          Genette claims that “in any narrative in autobiographical form... [the] erzählende ich 
(the narrating I) and erzähltes Ich (the narrated I) are separated...by a difference in age and 
experience” (252). Leaving all considerations of an autobiography written in the present tense 
aside, this “authorizes the former to treat the latter with a sort of condescending or ironic 
superiority” (Genette 252). Severian the narrating I does not show this kind of condescension 
towards his other self; in fact, Severian does not appear to have an sense of irony, then or 
now. This is perhaps a trait that makes him fit to be the New Sun. Be that as it may, like 
Marcel, the discontinuity between his two selves over the course of the narrative cannot be 
“reducible simply to “development” (Genette 253). If a bildungsroman is told in the 
subsequent first-person, the gap between the narrating I and the narrated I is decreased in 
proportion “as the hero progresses in “apprenticeship” to life” (Genette 253). Again, like the 
narrator of Recherche du temps perdu, Severian “does not simply know more, empirically, 
than the hero; he knows in the absolute sense, he understands the Truth” (Genette 253). In this 
way, Shadow reads part bildungsroman and part religious literature. 
          Severian must suppress his knowledge of the Truth of which he is now aware when 
narrating the events of his life. The difference between the narrating I and the narrated I is 
now no longer only one of maturity; it is the difference between a mortal and a kind of god, 
or demi-god – Autarch and New Sun, the conciliator come again. Each miracle that Severian 
performs with the Claw of the Conciliator, a relic the narrated I believes came into his 
possession by chance, must be represented in such a way as not to reveal the miraculous 
which is maintained between himself and the fragment of the long dead Conciliator, “a 
historical messianic figure who lived in the age of Typhon” (Andre-Driussi 90). For example, 
when Severian dives into the Lake of Birds in the Botanical Gardens to retrieve Terminus 
Est, he encounters a “hand [that] was pulling my own, drawing me down” (Shadow 178). 
Simmons 37 
 
   
 
This hand belongs to Dorcas, a corpse laden with sling-stones that is reanimated through 
contact with Severian and the relic he carries. But in the scene, Severian exclaims “Whatever 
she is, she saved me” (Shadow 180), reversing and obscuring the reality of the situation that 
the narrating I knows: the Truth which will only be revealed at the very end of his narrative in 
The Citadel of the Autarch (1982). 
          It is here, when one acknowledges the “person” of the narrator that the dialogic nature 
of the novel shines. The narrating I, from the time he writes the first sentence to the time of 
the last, where the final revelation is revealed, knows who he is and the significance of his 
status. The metadiegesis ends when convergence happens: “disembodied voices, hundred-
tongued, demand[ed] that Valeria report to some antiquely titled personage who I realized 
with a start must be myself” (Sword & Citadel 611). This revelation, during the entirety of 
the narrative, is concealed for the sake of the narratee. 
          According to Genette’s narratology, the “narratee” and the “reader” are two separate 
entities. Both are a kind of receiver of information, and like the aims of reader-response 
theory, Genette does not think “the receiver’s role here is purely passive, that he is limited to 
receiving a message he must take or leave” (259). He goes on to say that “nothing would be 
more contrary to Proust’s convictions” (259), and it would be fair to argue that the same 
holds true for Gene Wolfe. It is often said that Wolfe demands much from his readers, which 
is certainly the case with a novel like Shadow, which, like Gadamer writes of Franz Kafka’s 
work, “creates the impression that everything in it actually points beyond itself to something 
else” (Gadamer 71). But the novel cannot be interpreted as an allegory, as any attempt to 
decode a meaning in the text is ultimately disappointed. It is as Gadamer remarks: “[it] 
evokes poetically the mere semblance of allegory and opens out onto a realm of ambiguity” 
(71). It is amid this “realm of ambiguity” that the reader is demanded to work; realization is a 
task given to the reader. 
           Nevertheless, the narratee, unlike the reader, is a presumed audience within the 
diegesis. The intradiegetic narrator Severian intends his efforts towards an intradiegetic 
narratee. Even when Severian states in The Urth of the New Sun that it is absurd to think “this 
will ever find a reader” (1), Shadow on several occasions directly flags an implied, 
intradiegetic readership. One example which has already been mentioned is at the beginning 
of the avern duel scene, where Severian writes: “The Sanguinary Field, of which all my 
readers will have heard, though some, I hope, will never have visited it, lies northwest of the 
built sections of our capital” (Shadow 210). This suggests that Severian intends his narrative 
to be read by a contemporary audience, one which would have physically been able to visit 
Simmons 38 
 
   
 
these decadent killing-fields. As far as the effect this has on a narrative, Genette argues that it 
keeps the reader “at a distance, since he [the narratee] is always interposed between the 
narrator and us” (260). Likewise, even a third-person omniscient science fantasy novel such 
as Jack Vance’s City of the Chasch (1968), which disguises both narrator and narratee, 
“always contains below the surface an appeal to the receiver” (Genette 260). This relative 
transparency of the narratee removes the distance between the narrator and real reader, 
allowing them to identify themselves more thoroughly with the intradiegetic reader. This 
brings one full circle to the concept of distance as it relates to showing (mimesis) and telling 
(diegesis).  
          Severian speaking to his readers again reveals the incredible self-absorption of the 
novel. Unlike Proust, who Genette quotes as saying it is “from the insincere language of 
prefaces and dedications, that the writer speaks of ‘my reader’. In reality every reader is, 
while he is reading, the reader of his own self”” (261), Severian stresses that he carries his 
readers along: “Here I pause, having carried you, reader, from gate to gate” (Shadow 274). 
This is as if to say, “make no mistake about it: I am the author and you, reader, are along for 
the ride – do as you may with interpretation”. 
           Having identified some of the formal features which characterize Severian’s 
autobiography, it is time to turn towards examining how these features give rise to the 
mythological dimension of his account. The following section will argue that it is the 
relationship between the narrating I and the narrated I which produces mythic gaps, or what 
can be called the “undivided perception” of Severian’s discourse. This involves temporal and 
spatial difference, but ultimately lies in the narrating strategies of the “person” who is not 
only unwilling to impart his world’s secrets, but perhaps does not even know them 
objectively himself.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simmons 39 
 
   
 
The Myth of Urth 
 
The previous section identified and examined some of the key formal features which mark 
The Shadow of the Torturer. These fell under the main headings “mood” and “voice”, and 
included the conceptual problems of “distance”, “perspective”, “focalization”, “the narrating 
instance”, “time of narrating”, and “narrative levels”. While all these concepts are 
distinguishable from one another and present the critic with particular ways of access, they 
are related by their shared emphasis on the divide between who is speaking and who is 
perceiving in a text. For example, when it comes to the concept of “distance”, it is a matter of 
the narrator (the speaker) being more or less present. Involved is a matter of contention 
between speaker and perceiver which ultimately determines the “mood” of a narrative. 
Likewise, “the narrating instance”, discussed under the heading “voice”, examines “not only 
the person who carries out or submits to the action, but also the person (the same one or 
another) who reports it” (Genette 213). “The narrating instance” regurgitates this dichotomy 
of speaker and perceiver, and only distinguishes itself from the former by placing extra stock 
on where someone narrates. These narratological concepts were applied to Shadow because 
much of the narrative’s excitement is in this contended space between the narrating I and the 
narrated I; furthermore, that is where the making of myth occurs – or as I will argue, is 
compounded. 
          The Merriam-Webster dictionary defines “myth” in several ways. First, myth is “a 
usually traditional story of ostensibly historical events that serves to unfold part of the world 
view of a people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomenon”. The term can also 
refer to “a popular belief or tradition that has grown up around something or someone” or “a 
person or thing having only an imaginary or unverifiable existence” (3:a). This definition is 
valuable because it expresses the contingent duality of the concept of myth: it contains both 
facts and the imaginary, or what is strictly unverifiable. Myth speaks of “historical events” 
and “natural phenomenon”, but only ostensibly. Myth acts to reconcile the material and ideal, 
a theme situated at the heart of Shadow. 
          In Strategies of Fantasy, Brian Attebery observes: “Science fantasy can derive humor 
from science, from magic...but the clash of rhetorics is not always funny” (118). Instead, 
what can occur, as in the case of Shadow, is that their fusion results “in a new intellectual 
synthesis, or their confrontation in an aesthetic experience” (Koestler 45). This “aesthetic 
experience” Koestler speaks of is the making of myth: the creation of an undivided 
Simmons 40 
 
   
 
perception which incorporates both the spiritual and the material, the abstract and the 
concrete. Today, when one speaks of myth, it is in relation to make-believe. This is heard in 
the expression “that is just a myth”. But to think of mythmaking as an exercise in the 
production of the fantastic is to err. Rather, myth emerges from an “undivided perception”: 
the confrontation and combination of the figurative and literal. As Attebery argues, “what the 
serious writer of science fantasy is attempting to do is not to recapture an older worldview but 
to forge a new one from elements that have long been developing in isolation” (120). 
Nowhere is this strategy more paramount than in Gene Wolfe’s Book of the New Sun, which 
does not look towards the past to recover the magic of existence but projects a far future earth 
which marries both worldviews to produce scenes of sheer otherness.  
         What is peculiar about Attebery’s treatment of science fantasy is that after dwelling on 
“the undivided perception from which myth emerged” (119; emphasis added), he goes on to 
praise certain writers for juxtaposing the fantastic and scientific perspectives. He begins by 
saying that Ursula K. Le Guin, despite her self-criticism, manages to “mingle the scientific 
and mythic perspectives with ever increasing conviction” (120). As stated previously in the 
chapter, it is the mingling which produces the mythic, but he falls into the common-sense trap 
of replacing “magical” or “fantastic” with the term “mythic”. Attebery then complains that Le 
Guin’s novels would have been even more successful if “she had kept her science more 
rigorously scientific and her magic less eclectic” (121). Similarly, Attebery says that Samuel 
Delany’s novel The Einstein Intersection (1967) exhibits “a particularly ingenious way of 
juxtaposing the rational and emotional or scientific and magical perspectives” (121; emphasis 
added). There is no talk of the reconciliation initially ascribed to mythmaking, only of the 
ways in which science fantasy manages to contrast the magical and scientific worldviews. 
Admittedly, Attebery does suggest there is an understanding which occurs in the space which 
these contrasts or juxtapositions create. He remarks that in Le Guin’s Rocannon’s World the 
hero “come[s] to view the natives’ outlook as no less valid than his own: what he has been 
calling telepathy and coincidence might with equal justice be called magic and fate” (121). 
All sense of reconciliation arises from marked differences between the fantastic and scientific 
in the diegesis.  
          This dissertation would argue that any difference between worldviews that occurs in 
Shadow is minimal, and that from this relatively undivided perception springs its mythic 
force. Furthermore, the mythic perspective cannot be traced to Severian, whether he is the 
narrator or the hero. It is a mythic epistemology that reigns over Urth during an age when the 
sun is almost dead. This notion will be argued by looking at the ways of perceiving that are 
Simmons 41 
 
   
 
accomplished by both the narrated I and the narrating I, who are separated from one another 
not only by time but by degrees of knowledge concerning the world which they inhabit.  
          As Attebery admits, “Wolfe’s imagined world easily accepts the discourse of either 
form [science fiction and fantasy], for it projects a time when advanced technology represents 
not the future but the distant past, traces of which remain and mingle with the magic that may 
be only technology advanced more still” (123). In this sense magic and technology are never 
juxtaposed and are so eerily similar that the reader must work out which is which, if there 
even is a difference. One can agree with Attebery that “every step of his [Severian’s] task is 
mythic” (124), though this is not due to fantastic overtones like “his two talismans, the 
executioner’s sword and the healing jewel” (Attebery 124) but to the discreet fusion which 
occurs in the novel. 
          Returning to the first chapter of Shadow, Severian witnesses the discharge of a “pistol” 
for the first time. Now with focus on the protagonist, he writes “[t]here was a shot, a thing I 
had never seen before, the bolt of violet energy splitting the darkness like a wedge, so that it 
closed with a thunderclap” (Shadow 4). In the appendix to book four, The Citadel of the 
Autarch, G.W. (the lowest level of narration) explains that “[t]he pistol given Thea by 
Vodalus and the one given Ouen by Severian are unquestionably stellar weapons” and that “it 
seems fairly clear that stellar weapons could not be produced on Urth and had to be obtained 
from the Hierodules at great cost” (613). This extradiegetic knowledge is not shared by either 
the narrated or the narrating Severian. The narrated Severian in the necropolis scene 
apprehends the shot discharged by a stellar weapon as a mere “violet energy splitting the 
darkness”, something that could just as easily be attributed to some arcane spell or other. Nor 
does the more experienced Severian who takes part in a battle against the Ascians in The 
Citadel of the Autarch (1983) offer better explanation of this technology, when he states “I 
had no idea what sort of device was used to project these bolts, or even whether they were in 
fact pure energy or some type of missile” (Sword & Citadel 471). Even the extradiegetic 
G.W. which signs the appendix writes “Nowhere are the manuscripts of The Book of the New 
Sun more obscure than in their treatment of weapons” (Sword & Citadel 612). The only 
indication that this was not an issue of pure magic comes when Severian says the “pistol” 
Vodalus handed over “caught the moonlight like a mirror” (Shadow 6), which suggests that it 
is at least an artifact, however indeterminate 
          Attebery claims that every step Severian takes “also fits into the rhetorical pattern of 
science fiction, for each involves his learning another lost secret of the technological past and 
thereby gaining more control over his life” (124). I would argue that this is only partially the 
Simmons 42 
 
   
 
case. Severian does glean knowledge of his world and its underpinnings throughout his 
journey, but these are only vaguely of a technological character, and often result in deeper 
layers of the fantastic. For example, the Matachin Tower which houses the torturer’s guild is 
initially presented as part of a keep, or stronghold in the medieval vein. Severian describes it 
as being: 
            Situated toward the back of the Citadel, upon the western side. At ground level are the 
studies of our masters, where consultations with the officers of justice and the heads 
of other guilds are conducted. Our common room is above them, with its back to the 
kitchen. Above that is the refectory, which serves us as an assembly hall as well as an 
eating place. Above it are the private cabins of the masters, in better days much more 
numerous...the real work of our guild is carried out below all this. Just underground 
lies the examination room; beneath it, and thus outside the tower proper (for the 
examination room was the propulsion chamber of the original structure) stretches the 
labyrinth of the oubliette. (Shadow 18) 
While this entire passage appears narrated from the perspective of the narrated I, the 
parenthesis contains information Severian has learned since venturing out from its confines: 
“the examination room was the propulsion chamber of the original structure”. This affirms 
what Attebery says of Severian’s journey affording him knowledge of the “technological 
past”, but this knowledge comes to Severian by way of one Dr. Talos labels “a professional 
tale-teller" (Shadow 273), the android Jonas who claims to know the “story” of the Citadel, 
and confesses sadly that “this is the only tale I know- or nearly so” (Shadow 273). He relates 
to Severian that “[m]any of the people were angry at the building of that citadel, holding it to 
be their right to slay their lords without hindrance if they so desired. But others went out in 
the ships that ply between the stars, returning with treasure and knowledge” (Shadow 273). 
With these clues that the Citadel could have once functioned as “starport during the First 
Empire period of the Age of the Monarch” (Andre-Driussi 84), the narrating Severian 
reimagines the examination room as a propulsion chamber. This is contrasted with the 
perspective of the narrated Severian, who only describes this area by saying “It was not a 
prepossessing place. About half of the old lights still burned, but mud had seeped into the 
corridors until it lay to the thickness of one’s hand. A duty table stood where it had been left, 
perhaps, two hundred years before” (Shadow 29). Severian has indeed gained knowledge 
with time, but it is not necessarily a technological or scientific knowledge but is wrapped in a 
kind of legend that can only be taken with a grain of salt. In this way the mythic is 
Simmons 43 
 
   
 
compounded: the undivided perception of the narrating I which makes no distinction between 
tall-tale and fact, but accepts both as possible truths. 
         The fact that Severian conceals what Genette calls the “final revelation” works to 
contribute to the novel’s mythological texture. When Severian enters Valeria’s towers, a 
section of the Citadel, for the final time and realizes that the “antiquely titled personage” 
(Citadel of the Autarch 611) which its walls announce is none other than himself, it is only 
then, at the very end of the New Sun tetralogy, that the reader realizes this structure was made 
for him. In Shadow, Valeria only remarks “How strange that [Severian] should come up in 
the Atrium of Time” (33). Valeria’s towers, and their function, are shrouded in mystery and 
bygone myth for the protagonist, who explains: 
            Her family [Valeria’s] occupied these towers. They had waited, at first, to leave Urth 
with the autarch of their era, then had waited because there was nothing left for them 
but waiting. They had given many castellans to the Citadel, but the last had died 
generations ago; they were poor now, and their towers were in ruins. Valeria had 
never gone above the lower floors. (Shadow 34) 
The narrating I, who finally signs the account “Severian the Lame, Autarch”, knows that 
these towers serve a different purpose, namely a “time-traveling portal to a larger structure, 
like the ground level of the Last House, located in the heart of the Citadel” (Andre-Driussi 
30). Severian’s final revelations do not offer a “contrast between high and low technologies” 
(Attebery 121), or even a technological knowledge that Attebery claims Severian receives 
through his many adventures and encounters. Instead, what the reader works out to be a 
speaker system still shows up to the mature Severian as quasi-magical: “something had 
wakened in the time-worn walls, its disembodied voices, hundred-tongued, demanding that 
Valeria report to some antiquely titled personage who I realized with a start must be myself” 
(Sword & Citadel 611). In a sense, this final scene only reinforces the mythic wonder 
generated by the initial encounter in Shadow. This follows the line of argument that Attebery 
makes about the Book of the New Sun projecting a time when advanced technology represents 
not the future but the distant past, traces of which remain and mingle with the magic that may 
be only technology advanced still. The intercom system installed in Valeria’s towers is an 
example of this ambiguous instance of something that could be magic or technology, or both 
simultaneously. But contrary to what Attebery claims of Wolfe making “full use of science 
fantasy’s double vision” (124), it is the single vision that Severian produces which gives the 
novel its mythic weight. The two rhetorical systems, magic and science, are never clearly 
Simmons 44 
 
   
 
defined in Severian’s tale. The narrating Severian only lends greater mythic complexity to a 
situation or instance of technology that the narrated Severian apprehends only crudely. 
         Such a situation occurs when the narrator gives a retrospect of Master Gurloes, one of 
the heads of the torturer’s guild. After Master Gurloes assigns Severian to personally deal 
with the Chatelaine Thecla, which includes “[sitting] with her while she eats”, there is a 
paragraph break which separates the mimesis from the diegesis. Severian then writes, in the 
tones of a memoire: 
           Gurloes was one of the most complex men I have known...Sometimes he went to the 
top of our tower, above the guns, and waited there talking to himself, peering through 
glass said to be harder than flint for the first beams. He was the only one in our guild 
– Master Palaemon not excepted – who was unafraid of the energies there and the 
unseen mouths that spoke sometimes to human beings and sometimes to other mouths 
in other towers and keeps. (Shadow 64) 
At this point it is safe to assume that Severian knows the original function of the Matachin 
Tower, since he refers to Jonas’s tall tale several times in the narrative with conviction. But 
this does not seem to entail a better technological understanding of it. If the reader now 
imagines the tower as a grounded space-shuttle, with the propulsion chamber at the bottom, 
this place in which Gurloes stands must be something like a flight deck, with windows made 
to withstand the incredible heat and pressures of intergalactic travel. It appears to also be 
equipped with an intercom system, which Severian interprets as “unseen mouths” which 
connect to others throughout the complex. The vast electronic apparatus which powers the 
ship is regarded as “energies”, which suggests something somewhere between technology 
and magic. There is an instance in Shadow where the electricity supplied by the Matachin 
tower is comically referred to as “lightning”. In one of the examination rooms, reserved for 
cruel forms of torture, Severian explains: 
            Antique lights like blood-red eyes gleamed on the control panel, and a droning like 
the song of some huge insect filled the entire chamber. For a few moments, the 
ancient engine of the tower lived again. One cable was loose, and sparks as blue as 
burning brandy played about its bronze fittings. (Shadow 100). 
Severian gives Master Gurloes’ response in direct dialogue: “Lightning,” Master Gurloes said 
as he rammed the loose cable home. “There’s another word for it, but I forget” (Shadow 100). 
The narrating I does nothing to correct his former master’s fallacy. 
          Attebery claims that “many of the most vivid inventions [in The Book of the New Sun] 
are the direct result of the science fiction-fantasy fusion” (124). An emphasis should be laid 
Simmons 45 
 
   
 
upon the word fusion, which according to the Merriam-Webster dictionary means “a merging 
of diverse, distinct, or separate elements into a unified whole” (2: a). Again, the worldviews 
are not presented in marked contrast but fused into an indiscernible whole that embodies a 
touch of both: the revelation of the myth. Attebery cites the cyborg Jonas as an example of 
one of these inventions, and it is worth exploring this figure further. When Severian first 
encounters Jonas, focalization is through the narrated I, who notes that “The stranger pushed 
back his battered hat, and I saw that in place of his right hand he wore a jointed contrivance 
of steel” (Shadow 273). This is a curious case of Severian demystifying the phenomenon. 
Instead of seeing an arm of hammered quicksilver, or something equally fantastic, he only 
wears a contrivance of steel, suggesting something exterior.  
          Michael Andre-Driussi, through a close reading of all four books in the Book of the 
New Sun, has determined that Jonas is “an android sailor who left Urth in the First Empire 
period...when his ship returned to Urth (perhaps 200 years prior to the reign of Severian), 
there was no longer a port” (194). This missing port was the cause of the crash which 
disfigured Jonas so that he had to repair himself with “biological material salvaged from an 
Urth man who had been killed on the ground by the landing” (Andre-Driussi 194). This 
suggests that Jonas’s mechanical limb is not a prosthetic, but the reverse: all that Severian 
perceives as the flesh of Jonas is in fact artificial. This is what causes Attebery to view Jonas 
as a “tragic figure burdened by his partial humanity” (124). But Severian, both the narrated 
and narrating I, does not perceive this fact so readily or clearly. 
          When Jonas is severely wounded by the young exultants at the House Absolute, 
Severian attempts to heal him with the Claw of the Conciliator:  
            To reach the lower end of the wound, I lifted the cloth a trifle. When I thrust in my 
hand, I heard a faint note; the gem had struck metal. Drawing back the cloth more, I 
saw that my friend’s skin ended as abruptly as grass does where a large stone lies, 
giving way to shining silver. My first thought was that it was armor; but soon I saw 
that it was not. Rather, it was metal standing in the place of flesh, just as metal stood 
in the place of his right hand. How far it continued I could not see, and I was afraid to 
touch his legs for fear of waking him. (The Claw of the Conciliator 120) 
Even with this revelation, Severian the narrated is hesitant to claim his companion is android 
or human. He only reports to Jonas, after he wakes up, that “You’re patched with metal...not 
just your hand. I’ve known that for some time, friend monster Jonas” (The Claw of the 
Conciliator 126). The worldview of Severian, or his epistemological outlook, is revealed 
Simmons 46 
 
   
 
here: the distinction between science and magic, human and robot is blurred by an undivided 
phenomenology.  
         Even something as nondescript as Terminus Est, Severian’s carnificial sword, is 
charged with tones of myth. Before departing the Citadel as a newly minted exile, Master 
Palaemon presents Severian with the sword, claiming that “when a gift is deserved, it is not a 
gift but a payment” (Shadow 111). Severian gives the reader a catalogue of the sword’s 
virtues, now clearly focalized through the narrating I who looks back on the memory: “you 
would have to see her and hold her to judge her justly” (Shadow 112). He goes on to describe 
the sword in glowing terms: “Her grip was onyx bound with silver bands, two spans long and 
terminated with an opal. Art had been lavished upon her...the words Terminus Est had been 
engraved upon her blade in curious and beautiful letters [these are in Latin]” (Shadow 112). 
Here, Severian presents an object that is clearly a man-made artifact. The reader is given no 
clues to it being anything but a finely wrought weapon.  
          This is subtly altered when Severian nearly loses Terminus Est on the Lake of Endless 
Sleep. Having fallen into the murky waters, he writes “I realized that I had dropped Terminus 
Est, and at that moment losing that blade seemed more terrible than the chance of death” 
(Shadow 178). This not only makes the reader privy to the almost spiritual connection 
between carnifax and his tool but reawakens one of the most potent myths of all: that of King 
Arthur and his famous sword Excalibur. As Severian relates: 
            My frantically groping hand encountered the blessed, familiar shape of her onyx grip. 
At the same instant, my other hand touched an object of a completely different kind. It 
was another human hand, and its grasp coincided so perfectly with the recovery of 
Terminus Est that it seemed the hand’s owner was returning my property to me. 
(Shadow 178) 
As Andre-Driussi notes, the line ““it seemed the hand’s owner was returning my property to 
me” [recalls the moment] the Lady of the Lake gives the sword to King Arthur” (342). Not 
only is the act of regaining Terminus Est through quasi-magical means reminiscent of 
Arthurian legend, but the figure of Dorcus is in many ways homologous with the Lady of the 
Lake, especially the one found in the French prose work Merlin, where she is depicted as 
“’white’ and innocent” (Berthelot 67); note also that on several occasions Severian speaks of 
Dorcas as “strangely childlike, though fully a woman” (Shadow 233).The connection to 
Arthurian legend is compounded in The Sword of the Lictor when Severian returns the 
fragments of Terminus Est to the waters of Lake Diuturna:”What remained of my blade I 
kissed and cast into the water” (Sword & Citadel 294). 
Simmons 47 
 
   
 
          Admittedly, the source of this mythic rendering cannot be traced to the narrator but is 
an intertextual nod that must be drawn out by the reader. Nevertheless, one must wonder 
what kind of narratives Severian has read in the “brown book” that he carries with him 
throughout his journey. This is titled The Book of the Wonders of Urth and Sky, which the 
librarian Ultan describes as “a standard work, three or four hundred years ago. It relates most 
of the familiar legends of ancient times” (Shadow 51). Could Severian have augmented his 
own narrative with the legend of Excalibur, seeking to produce a sense of fate which would 
link him to his own blade? It is not outside the realm of possibility, as Wolfe plants several 
references to the reader’s own time throughout the course of the narrative, such as the picture 
Severian encounters which shows “an armored figure standing in a desolate landscape. It had 
no weapon, but held a staff bearing a strange, stiff banner. The visor of this figure’s helmet 
was entirely of gold, without eye slits or ventilation” (Shadow 38). Additionally, this is 
another example of Severian’s undivided perception, as he interprets this representation not 
only as a document of the past, but as something strange, even other-worldly: Neil Armstrong 
is reduced to a creature of myth.  
         To make a final illustration of the fusion between the magical and technological which 
gives Shadow its mythic air, one can return to the Sanguinary Field where the combat 
between Severian and the Septentrion unfolds. The horrific quality of the averns, which are 
used as weapons, first appears through the logic of botany to Severian, as Agia informs him 
that “The leaves are poisoned...twisting your mantle tight about your arm will give you some 
protection, but try not to touch them” (Shadow 190). When Severian tries to pluck one, the 
plant reveals a hallucinogenic, strange property that is never reduced to anything solely 
scientific (a kind of excretion or other) or magic:  
            I had knelt beside it and was reaching toward it when as though a veil had been 
snatched away I realized that my hand, which I had thought still several spans from 
the needlelike point of the nearest leaf, was about to be impaled. I drew it back 
hurriedly; the plant seemed almost out of reach- indeed, I was not certain I could 
touch its stem even by lying prone. (Shadow 191) 
Like the figure of the alzabo creature, which Attebery offers as an example of Wolfe’s 
science fiction-fantasy inventiveness, the avern when plucked, and when used in combat, 
seems to refuse to be apprehended as anything but mythic, which is the fusion of both sets of 
reasoning. When Severian regains consciousness after being pricked by one of the avern’s 
deadly leaves, he writes: “I touched the stem of my avern, and for an instant felt I had 
grasped the tail of some cold-blooded animal. It seemed to stir in my hand” (Shadow 215). 
Simmons 48 
 
   
 
Additionally, he claims that he felt “my own avern was pulling me backward, or rather, my 
avern was gone and someone gripped me by the hand” (Shadow 215). In this case, the reader 
cannot be certain whether these strange qualities can be reduced to the botanical constitution 
of the extraterrestrial plant, a kind of magic that surrounds it, or Severian’s own confusion in 
the heat of combat.  
           Dorcas, who witnesses the entire martial episode, later speaks of the avern at greater 
length, but only manages to further its ambivalence. She tells Severian that she saw the petals 
unfurl and reveal “something underneath, something else, a face like the face poison would 
have, if poison had a face...you picked it up and it began to curl toward you, slowly, as 
though it were only half awake” (Shadow 219). Here Dorcas attaches a kind of agency to the 
flower, so that the reader is left trying to grasp what makes this thing so vaguely uncanny: 
science, magic, or a kind of alien personality which is simply Other? 
          That Wolfe chose to call these murderous perennials “averns” reveals their intended 
mythic character. Andre-Driussi points out that they are “named after Avernus (“the birdless 
lake” near Puteoli, said to be an entrance to infernal regions) because no birds can survive 
around it” (39). This example illustrates the way the creation of new mythologies in the Book 
of the New Sun often imitate other legends and so obscure their foundations; like almost all 
the phenomena that litter Severian’s Urth, “neither way of referring to [them] exhausts the 
reality of the thing itself” (Attebery 124). 
 
This final section will argue that the mythic texture of Shadow is also dependent on narrative 
style. As was identified under the sub-heading narrative of events, Severian’s account shows 
both extreme mediation and utmost immediacy. This is due to it being composed largely in a 
naturalistic, or realistic mode, while still maintaining the narrator’s overt presence. In this 
way showing and telling are combined. The reader is shown the world of Urth by way of a 
detailed narrative, while never being able to forget that it is Severian doing the showing. 
          At first, this would seem to have the potential to disrupt the fusion which I have just 
argued is central to Wolfe’s mythmaking. If one agreed with Attebery’s claim that every step 
of Severian’s journey provides him with greater technological reasoning, the presence of the 
narrating I would provide a contrast, a juxtaposition, between the two modes of seeing. The 
narrating I would be able to correct, or improve upon, the naïve perception of the narrated I. 
But the case is usually the opposite. While the mature Severian who narrates his life story 
may know more, it is not often in degrees scientific or technological; often his advanced 
Simmons 49 
 
   
 
knowledge only compounds the already mythic dimension of the phenomena caught by the 
narrated gaze. 
          Thus, it is worth looking at a key section where mimetic illusion is broken by the 
mediating presence of Severian and examining how this affects the production of myth.   
          Returning to Severian’s description of his guild and the tower it inhabits, the mythic 
quality of his inherited occupation asserts itself to both the narrated and the narrating I. He 
writes, now focalized through the narrating I, that “Traditions from our days of glory, 
antedating the present degenerate age, and the one before it, and the one before that, an age 
whose name is hardly remembered now by scholars” (Shadow 10) still punctuate life in the 
Matachin Tower. Indeed, knowledge of the structure and the life it contains is shrouded by 
age; traditions and functions do not have reasons because they come from a time of myth – a 
time whose very name “is hardly remembered”. In addition, in a heavily mediated passage in 
which the narrating I gives an overview of his guild’s logic, Severian claims that “It is said in 
ancient times there were both men and women in the guild, and that sons and daughters were 
born to them and brought up in the mystery” (Shadow 11). That it is merely “said” attests to 
the mythic dimension of Severian’s conclusions: his knowledge is adopted from hearsay 
about deep legend. 
          When describing the oubliette which is reserved for the housing of clients (those 
awaiting torture), Severian notes that “the lights of the oubliette are of that ancient kind that 
is said to burn forever, though some have now gone out” (Shadow 19). This is a description 
provided by the narrator, not the narrated, where the details of his past home are given in 
retrospect. It is not until the next sentence that focus is placed on the narrated Severian, who 
tells the reader that “my feelings that morning were not gloomy but joyous-here I would labor 
when I became a journeyman” (Shadow 19). But no better description of the lights can be 
given by the elder Severian, who Attebery claims has learned of the technological past. The 
lights still show up to him as something mysterious, only said to burn forever. The fact that it 
seems neither narrated nor narrator are privy to anything more than the legend of their 
wonder suggests that it is an issue of world-wide epistemology, rather than individual 
knowledge. 
      
 
 
 
Simmons 50 
 
   
 
Conclusion 
 
The novels which comprise Gene Wolfe’s Solar Cycle have always fascinated me. I can 
recall reading Shadow as a teenager and being both exhilarated and bewildered. Admittedly, I 
did not finish it the first time around. But some quality of it stuck with me which I could not 
quite put my finger on. So, I eventually picked it up a couple years later and managed to 
make it all the way through Severian’s narrative and beyond. I have continued to revisit 
Wolfe’s work as an adult, the Solar novels particularly, and their strangeness has never 
diminished. If anything, it has grown.  
          Consequently, this dissertation set out to accomplish several things, all of which relate 
to what Ursula Le Guin, Neil Gaiman call Wolfe’s “subtlety”. Given how strongly mediated 
Shadow is by Severian, identifying what it is that makes the novel strange, subtle, or elusive 
would logically start with a closer look at the “narrating instance” and its traces found in the 
novel. The first two sections of the analysis intended to prove that Severian’s discourse is 
formally complex, and at times ambivalent. In my experience, it is not often one finds such 
an example of extreme mediation and outmost immediacy contained in a single work. It is 
reminiscent of what Genette asserts is the marvel of Proustian narrative: the “temporal 
distance between the story and the narrating instance involves no model distance between the 
story and the narrative: no less, no weakening of the mimetic illusion” (Genette 168; original 
emphasis). By examining some key passages from Shadow, it was shown how, even in a 
single paragraph, the novel switches between the mimetic and diegetic: it can be picturesque, 
detailed, and immediate before suddenly reverting to the mediated, “distanced” tone favored 
by diegesis. Essentially, there is a constant strife between perspective and focalization. In 
addition, Shadow also illustrates a complexity of narrative “time” and “levels”. That Severian 
is writing his account subsequent to the events the narrative contains is made clear not only 
by use of past tense, but also by scenic and memorial markers which locate the narrator in a 
different segment of time and space than the story which they relate. Submitting Shadow to 
the concept of “levels” revealed how the primary narrative may not even be the events which 
constitute the novel but point beyond themselves to a greater metanarrative about the 
impending fate of Urth which rests on the future deeds of the narrator. All of this was an 
effort to identify some of the formal, narrative features which make Shadow so apparently so 
elusive and strange.  
Simmons 51 
 
   
 
          From this, it follows that the main contention is that the incongruity between the 
narrating I and the narrated I in Shadow produces a site where myth is made. This 
incongruity, or what can be called its “heteroglossia”, involves all the narratological 
categories explored, but perhaps most relevant to the production of myth is “perspective” and 
“person”. At first, it would seem this dissertation suggests that it is the rift between narrator 
and protagonist which produces myth. This would follow Attebery’s line of reasoning, where 
a learned Severian (the narrator) procures knowledge which is contrasted with that of the 
naïve protagonist, in turn making explicit the two ways of seeing the phenomena of Urth. 
Instead, what I have tried to show is that the incongruity between the narrator and protagonist 
only compounds the mythic, undivided experience of Shadow. Severian’s heteroglossia, as it 
turns out, is more of a working agreement than a rift. Though Severian comes to know more 
of his world with time, it is never of the strictly technological sort. If anything, his increased 
knowledge only deepens the ambiguity of the things about him.  
          In many respects this dissertation would draw the ire of Mary Poovey, who wrote in 
Uneven Developments (1988) that she did “not respect the boundaries of the texts…as 
formalist critics of all persuasions do” (15). Inarguably my analysis has fallen within the 
boundaries of Shadow. While my background contained cursory introductions to the genres 
of science fiction and fantasy, I did not really contextualize the novel within their discourses. 
Any further investigations of Wolfe’s Solar Cycle may do well by exploring this generic 
dimension further and the discontinuities it contains. Additionally, a Marxist critic could 
accuse me of being overly “idealistic” in my assessment of the novel. In fact, I never once 
address the ethico-political backdrop against which Shadow was written. The material and 
political conditions of the lifeworld in which Gene Wolfe conducted his work would appear 
nonexistent, though the case is quite otherwise. For example, one cannot fail to connect the 
concept of a dying earth (Urth) to the growing ecological awareness in the time it was written 
(1980). Finally, I would like to point out some of the more recent developments in 
narratology that could be applied to Shadow. Notably the work of Monika Fludernik. 
Fludernik, who in the process of developing her “natural” narratology criticizes Genette’s 
original concept of “voice”, which she considers an “interpretative”, or theoretical move.12 
Richard Azcel takes this argument up in his commentary to the essay “Understanding as 
Over-hearing: Towards a Dialogics of Voice”, claiming that there are “no voices in written 
texts; there are only ways…of metaphorically conceiving texts as voiced in the act or play of 
                                                           
12 See Fludernik’s article “New Wine in Old Bottles? Voice, Focalization, and New Writing” in New 
Literary History vol. 32, 2001, pp. 619-638 for a greater understanding of her criticism of Genette. 
Simmons 52 
 
   
 
reading” (704). This approach takes cues from reader-response criticism by placing emphasis 
on the activity of the reader. A dialogic reading of Shadow could be potentially fruitful given 
the stress the novel places on the ability of the reader to, so to say, fill in the gaps. 
          In closing, this dissertation aspired to examine some of the key traits of the double-
voiced discourse in Shadow. This discourse is one of the key ingredients to its mythical 
structure because it points, like a second-order sign, to the deeper, metaphysical constitution 
of Severian’s Urth. This metaphysical ground is what allows both the narrator and protagonist 
to judge his world in shades simultaneously technological and magical.  
 
      
 
 
      
 
      
 
      
 
 
       
      
      
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Simmons 53 
 
   
 
Bibliography 
 
Primary Sources 
 
Wolfe, Gene. The Shadow of the Torturer. Timescape Books, 1980. 
---. The Claw of the Conciliator. Timescape Books, 1981. 
---. Sword and Citadel. (1981-1983). Gollancz, 2016. 
---. The Urth of the New Sun. Tor, 1987. 
 
Secondary Sources 
 
“Fusion.” Def. 2, a. Merriam-webster.com. Merriam-Webster Dictionaries, Sep. 2017. Web. 
18 Feb. 2019. 
“Myth.” Def. 3, a. Merriam-webster.com. Merriam-Webster Dictionaries, Aug. 2015. Web. 
21 Apr. 2019. 
Attebery, Brian. Strategies of Fantasy. Indiana University Press, 1992. 
Andre-Driussi, Michael. Lexicon Urthus. Sirius Fiction, 1994. 
Auerbach, Erich. Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature. (1946). 
Princeton University Press, 2013. 
Azcel, Richard. ”Commentary: Throwing Voices”. New Literary History, vol. 32, 2001, pp. 
703-706. 
Barfield, Owen. Poetic Diction: A Study in Meaning. 1964. Wesleyan University Press, 1984. 
Barthes, Roland. “The Reality Effect”. French Literary Theory Today, vol. 21, no.1, 1982, 
pp. 11-17. 
Berthelot, Anne. “Merlin and the Ladies of the Lake”. Arthuriana, vol. 10, no. 1, 2000, pp. 
55-81.  
Simmons 54 
 
   
 
Culler, Jonathan. ”Foreword.” Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method, Cornell University, 
1980, pp. 7 – 13. 
Friedman, Norman. Point of View in Fiction: The Development of a Critical Concept. Assoc., 
1955. 
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. The Relevance of the Beautiful and Other Essays. Cambridge 
University Press, 1986. 
Genette, Gerard. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method. Cornell University, 1980. 
Homer, et al. Iliad. 1260-1180 BC. Harvard University Press, 2001. 
Ingarden, Roman. The Literary Work of Art. Northwestern University Press, 1973. 
James, Edward, and Farah Mendlesohn. The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature. 
Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
---. The Cambridge Companion to Science Fiction. Cambridge University Press, 2003.  
Jameson, Fredric. Archaeologies of the Future. Verso, 2005. 
Kames, Henry Home. Elements of Criticism. 1762. Liberty Fund Inc., 2005. 
Koestler, Arthur. The Act of Creation. 1964. Last Century Media, 2014. 
Mendlesohn, Farah. “Introduction: reading science fiction.” The Cambridge Companion to 
Science Fiction, edited by Edward James and Farah Mendlesohn, Cambridge 
University Press, 2003, pp. 1 – 12. 
 Poovey, Mary. Uneven Developments. University of Chicago Press, 1988. 
Pouillon, Jean. Temps Et Roman. Gallimard, 1946. 
Rimmon, Shlomith. “A Comprehensive Theory of Narrative. Genette’s Figures III and the 
Structualist Study of Fiction”. Poetics and Theory of Literature, vol. 1, no. 1, 1976, 
pp. 33-62. 
 Scott, Walter. “On the Supernatural in Fictitious Composition and in Particularly in the 
works of E.T.W. Hoffmann”. Foreign Quarterly Review, vol. 1, no. 1, 1827, pp. 60-
98. 
Simmons 55 
 
   
 
Stableford, Brian. ”Science fiction before the genre.” The Cambridge Companion to Science 
Fiction, edited by Edward James and Farah Mendlesohn, Cambridge University Press, 
2003, pp. 15 – 31. 
Thomsen, Brian. The American Tradition of Fantasy. Tor Books, 2002. 
Wolfe, K. Gary. ”Fantasy from Dryden to Dunsany.” The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy 
Literature, edited by Edward James and Farah Mendlesohn, Cambridge University 
Press, 2012, pp. 7 – 20. 
 
 
 
 