We have implemented additional assurance measures to protect our systems.
As a result, we have suspended some of our systems and services. We apologise for any temporary disruption some customers may experience.
Discover Content Products and Services RegisterLog In Logo for Cambridge Core from Cambridge University Press. Click to return to homepage. Search Logo for Cambridge Core from Cambridge University Press. Click to return to homepage. BrowseServicesOpen researchInstitution LoginSearchMenu links
Hostname: page-component-5d84bcc8dc-59lmv Total loading time: 0 Render date: 2026-09-05T11:50:34.606Z Has data issue: false hasContentIssue false Home >Books >Attending Daedalus >Preface Attending Daedalus Gene Wolfe, Artifice and the Reader Read book online Book contents Frontmatter Dedication Contents Acknowledgements Preface A Note on Editions AbbreviationsPart I InitiationsPart II Investigations: The Urth CyclePart III Conclusions Notes Bibliography Index This chapter is part of a book that is no longer available to purchase from Cambridge Core Preface Peter Wright Chapter Accessibility Book contents Frontmatter Dedication Contents Acknowledgements Preface A Note on Editions AbbreviationsPart I InitiationsPart II Investigations: The Urth CyclePart III Conclusions Notes Bibliography Index Get access Share Cite Summary Gene Wolfe has written a distinguished body of science fiction, fantasy and science fantasy that has been widely reviewed and admired. To date, he has published 20 novels, a collection of wartime letters, a volume of poetry and over 100 short stories. In view of his critical success, his reputation, and his considerable canon, it may seem remarkable that this is only the second book-length study of his fiction and the first to address any material published after 1983.
However, as the majority of critics and reviewers who have approached his oeuvre would admit, Gene Wolfe is a complex and wily writer, ambiguous, subtle and playful. His fiction is intricately wrought, densely allusive, and conceptually elusive; it encourages misreadings, demands thoughtful reflection, and is able to involve the reader in labyrinthine possibilities for interpretation. The elaborate and puzzling nature of Wolfe's writing, together with the fact that Wolfe works in a popular cultural form, seems to explain his critical neglect.
Confronted, then, with the magnitude and range of Wolfe's output and the paucity of detailed analyses available, it seemed critically advantageous to concentrate the focus of the present volume on the conceptual and thematic centre of Wolfe's corpus, the four-volume The Book of the New Sun and its coda, The Urth of the New Sun. For a variety of reasons, Attending Daedalus has taken an unusually long time from submission to publication. The manuscript was delivered in 1999, before Tor published On Blue's Waters, the first volume of Wolfe's The Book of the Short Sun. When I was sent proofs in June 2003, it was tempting to rewrite the concluding chapter to include a discussion of The Book of the Short Sun. I resisted that temptation, primarily because I felt I had little to add to my treatment of The Book of the New Sun and its sequel. Any consideration of The Book of the Short Sun would certainly have lengthened my argument, but I doubted that it would have developed or deepened it to any meaningful extent. Secondly, Attending Daedalus was always intended to encourage others to write about Gene Wolfe, whose work deserves more attention than it has yet received, despite the efforts of many perceptive, dedicated and enthusiastic Wolfe scholars to foster dialogue and debate.
To save this book to your Kindle, first ensure no-reply@cambridge.org is added to your Approved Personal Document E-mail List under your Personal Document Settings on the Manage Your Content and Devices page of your Amazon account. Then enter the ‘name’ part of your Kindle email address below. Find out more about saving to your Kindle.
Note you can select to save to either the @free.kindle.com or @kindle.com variations. ‘@free.kindle.com’ emails are free but can only be saved to your device when it is connected to wi-fi. ‘@kindle.com’ emails can be delivered even when you are not connected to wi-fi, but note that service fees apply.
Find out more about the Kindle Personal Document Service.
To save content items to your account, please confirm that you agree to abide by our usage policies. If this is the first time you use this feature, you will be asked to authorise Cambridge Core to connect with your account. Find out more about saving content to Dropbox.
To save content items to your account, please confirm that you agree to abide by our usage policies. If this is the first time you use this feature, you will be asked to authorise Cambridge Core to connect with your account. Find out more about saving content to Google Drive.
Please choose a valid location.
