WOlPE*DI5CH«DOZOIJ $2.50 winter/spring 1983 no. 19 SCIENCE FICTION mREVIEH/ $2.50 /heffielckcffinger It walks again by night . . . S H A Y © L MAGAZINE OF F6SF George Barr Michael Bishop Thomas Blackshear Richard Corben Ken Doggett Harlan Ellison Robert Haas Hank Jankus Jeff Jones Stephen King Tim Kirk George R.R. Martin Don Ivan Punchatz Howard Waldrop Michael Whelan This special anniversary issue features a full color cover by Michael Whelan and full color interior pages by Don Ivan Punchatz. $3/' icxctpaid SHAYOL • 8435 Carter Overland Park, KS 66212 ISSN 0198-6686 no. 19 SCIENCE FICTION in REVIEW CONTENTS The Alienated Critic: Editorial By Doug Fratz . 4 Interview: Gene Wolfe— “The Legerdemain of the Wolfe,” by Robert Frazier . 5 Beyond the Golden Age— Part II: The New Wave Years by Gardner Dozois . 10 Interview With Thomas Disch by Darrell Schweitzer ... 15 From the Pictured Urn by Charles Sheffield . 19 Caviary by George Alec Effinger . 22 The Thrust Awards: 1980-1981 Results . . 24 Reviews: Books, Etc. by Brown, Fratz, Puttus, Truesdale, Benedict, DiPrete, Schweitzer, Matthews and Glass .25 The Thrust Awards Ballot: 1982 . 31 Counter-Thrusts: Letters by Budrys, Glicksohn, Offutt, Schweitzer, Matthews, Hall, Lupoff, Doherty, Brown, and Salmonson . 34 GJ THRUST-SCIENCE FICTION IN REVIEW. Issue number 19. Winter/Spring 1983. ISSN: 0198-6686. Published two times per year, January and July, by Thrust Publications, 8217 Langport Terrace, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20877, U.S.A. Telephone: (301) 948-2514. Subscriptions: Subscriptions are available, six issues for $9.00 in North America, and six issues for $11.00 else¬ where. Single copies are $1.95 each in North America, $2.25 elsewhere. Please make all checks payable to Thrust Publi¬ cations, in U.S. dollars only. All subscrip¬ tions will begin with the next available issue. To have subscription start with present issue sent first class, add 50‘. Institutional subscriptions (only) will be billed. Back issues: Issues number 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 are available directly from Thrust Publications for $1.95 each, or four for $6.50, or eight for $12.00 in North America, and $2.25 each, or six for $12.00 elsewhere. Advertising: Display advertising rates are available upon request from Thrust Publications. Classified ads are 20‘ per word, per issue, minimum 20 words. For classified ads, payment must accompany copy. Deadlines are December 1 for the Winter/Spring issue and June 1 for the Summer/Fall issue. Wholesale Rates: Issues of Thrust are available at wholesale rates of 40% off (minimum: 15 copies) from Thrust Publi¬ cations, 8217 Langport Terrace, Gaithersburg, MD 20760. Standing orders are encouraged. Thrust is also available from the following Distributors: F&SF Book Company, Inc., P.O. Box 415, Staten Island, NY 11204. Seagate Distributors, Inc., 657 Fifth Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11215. Submissions: Unsolicited submissions, including articles, reviews, and artwork, are welcomed when accompanied by return postage. However, the publisher accepts no responsibility for unsolicited materials. All letters will be treated as publishable unless expressly otherwise requested. Entire contents © 1982 by Thrust Publi¬ cations. All rights reserved. Nothing may be reprinted without permission of both the author and the publisher. ART Dan Steffan . Cover C. Lee Healy . 4, 19 Charles N. Brown (photo) ... .5 Gary Raham . 10 Rachel E. Holman (photo) . . 15 Alfred Klosterman . 22, 25 Alexis Gilliland . 34 ADVERTISING Shayol Magazine . 2 SForum . 9 Wm. B. Eerdman’s Publishing Co . 30 Fantasy Newsletter . 32 Parsec Magazine . 33 Unclassified Ads . 38 Aesir Press . 39 Thrust Publications . 40 D. DOUGLAS FRATZ Publisher & Editor David Bischoff Michael Bishop George Alec Effinger Charles Sheffield Ted White Contributing Editors The Alienated Grille EDITORIN. doug frafz Has it really been ten years ? I've checked my records closely, and indeed it has been ten years since this magazine began as the dubious brainchild of one of the founders of the University of Maryland Science Fiction Society. Welcome, therefore, to Issue #19, the 10th Anniversary Issue of Thrust- Science Fiction in Review. It was the Fall of 1972 when I and several other science fic¬ tion fans attending the University of Maryland decided to create a sf club, and began Thrust to give us something to do. The first issue of Thrust hit the local College Park, Maryland newsstands in early February, 1973, selling out its 400 copy print run in less than two months. Although Thrust was a local campus success for several years and six issues, it never suc¬ ceeded in obtaining a single dollar in appropriations from the University. Among the other early members of the UMSFS were David Bischoff and Chris Lampton; Tom Monteleone was also involved, as an alumnus of UM, serving as an advisor on early Thrusts. I picked up the moribund magazine again in 1976, after having graduated in 1974, and started Thrust once again, this time as the professional, more widely distributed journal of sf and fantasy you see before you today. The full story of Thrust's early years appeared in Thrust #8. (A commercial interlude: Issue #8 is still available in back issue. I have also found three copies of Thrust #1 and four of Thrust #2, which I will make available to sf historians for $3.00 each.) The University of Maryland Science Fiction Society, incidentally, still exists after all these years, and is still putting on Unicons. As we enter our 11th year of publication, I would like to thank all of those who have provided the valuable assistance which has made Thrust the magazine it is today. Although Thrust has seen only 19 issues published, it has still managed to achieve widespread critical success in the sf community. I have no doubt that Thrust will be even more acclaimed over the next decade if I can find the time to increase its publishing fre¬ quency. Winners or Losers?: The results of the First Annual Thrust Awards can be seen elsewhere in this issue. As I hope a few of you remember from last issue, the Thrust Awards were started to recognize the most disappointing work in sf and fantasy in the previous year. The results are very interesting, and includ¬ ed, as expected, some of the major works and magazines of the years 198W981. The number of ballots filed by Thrust subscribers was, however, a bit less than I expected, with only 11 people responding. Readership polls are always difficult, especially when the concept is as bold and original as that represented by these awards. I expect next year’s response to improve, now that Thrust's readers have had a chance to get a feel for what this is all about. The ballot for the 1982 Thrust Awards can be found elsewhere in this issue. Vote! Only you can assure that the worst novels, collections, magazines and movies are nominated! A free issue of Thrust is surely worth the effort! A Word About Frequency: As many of you have noticed, there was no Thrust in July, 1982. I was forced to skip that issue, due to shortages of both time and money. I’m still in graduate school at night, at George Washington University, go¬ ing for a Masters in Environmental Science, as well as working full time. Graduate school has been consuming much time and money, to the detriment of Thrust’s publication schedule, but it will all be over in August of 1983. 1 hope all of you will be as hap¬ py to see August roll around as I will. Boring Job Story Finally Sells!: Those of you with good memories will recall that in Thrust #13, Charles Sheffield, in order to illustrate his point that potential sf writers should write about what they know best, promised to write and sell a story based on the Thrust reader with the most boring job. The winner, announced in issue #14, was Chet Clingan of Oroville, California, a senior janitor. Charles, true to his word, im¬ mediately began developing and writing a story based on Chet’s occupational setting. Selling it was somewhat more dif¬ ficult, possibly due to the unusual subject matter and setting. However, I am now proud to announce that “The Mouths of Earth" has been sold, and will appear in Rigeltt6. Charles has made his point, and I hope each of you will now sit down and write that sf story based on your boring job! Inebriated by his success, Charles has suggested that he accept the challenge of writing and selling ( somewhere ) a story based on the most implausible plot line or a particular historical person or event submitted by a Thrust reader. So clean out your files of all those inept story ideas you gave up on, and send them in to Thrust. (Charles, are you really this hard-up for story ideas?) Hugo Talk: My low frequency for Thrust has continued its decline in Hugo Awards. Last year, Thrust wasn’t even close to being nominated for the Hugo, and didn’t even make the top 17 Best Magazines/Fanzines in the 1982 Locus Poll. I’m sure Thrust will spring back if I can ever get back to publishing three times per year. The plans to split the fan magazine Hugo category into two categories, amateur fanzine and semi-professional magazine, should help as well; however, of this year’s nominees, only File 770 will fall into the fanzine category, with all the others clearly falling, as does Thrust, into the semi- professional category. Anyway, keep Thrust in mind when you’re nominating this year. I was spoiled by being nominated in 1980, and now I want more nominations! The Issue At Hand: A Special Tenth Anniversary Issue deserves to have a special all-star line-up, and I’ve put every ef¬ fort into making that true for this issue of Thrust. The lead arti¬ cle is Part II in Gardner Dozois’ Beyond the Golden Age series, "The New Wave Years”, wherein Gardner turns his critical eye towards the science fictional phenomena of the late 60’s/early 70’s commonly designated the New Wave. There will be at least one more installment of Beyond the Golden Age, which I hope we can arrange to have in Thrust #20. Part I of the series, by the wave, was published in the Summer/Fall 1981 issue of Star- ship. I am extremely happy to be able to feature interviews this issue with two of science fiction’s most widely respected literary stylists, Gene Wolfe and Tom Disch. Both are members of that rather small (but growing) group of sf writers known primarily for the literary quality of their fiction (a group which, in my mind, includes Thrust-columnist Michael Bishop, who has been absent for a couple of issues, but will be back.) Our regular columnists this issue are represented by Charles Sheffield and George Alec Effinger. Sheffield, ex- . . . .cont.on pg 9 Page 4 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 ilNTERViEW: GENE WOLFE “THE LEGERDEMAIN OF THE WOLFE” CONDUCTED BY ROBERT FRAZIER I first met Gene Wolfe in a hallway in Waterloo, Iowa in 1978. He promptly steered me away from a rather stuffy SFRA party where I knew no human, and engaged me in a conversa¬ tion that left poetry in the dust. My initial impression of Gene stands essentially unaltered today. He is an amiable and caring man blessed with a wry sense of humor that is both subtle and thought-provoking. He is apt to answer a query with a terse and precise reply, rather than talk on and on in vacuous phrases. Luckily, he is also blessed with great patience. Photo by C.N. Brown Thrust: Let’s start with a bit of fat on the fire. Do you consider the marketplace of science fiction as your main writing niche? Wolfe:l think I understand what you mean by “marketplace" and “niche” in this. I think you mean, "Do you, Gene Wolfe, consider yourself primarily a writer of science fic¬ tion?” Thrust: I feel like magic circle time. You are going to ask ques¬ tions back before answering mine. My answer is yes. Do you? Wolfe: More or less, if you mean for “Science Fiction” to in¬ clude science fantasy and speculative fiction and all that — SF in the broadest sense, in other words. The real question, which I am still asking myself, is whether I want to stay where I am. If by “niche” you mean perma¬ nent abode, I don’t know. I’m not content to have all my work labeled SF and sold in the SF marketplace, because I don’t think it is all SF. Thrust: Let’s try something more straightforward. I am going to guesstimate that you were thirtyish when you started writing. Wolfe:l was sick a lot as a child, and my mother read to me. Later I read a lot to myself. Shortly after I graduated from high school, I got the feeling that I could write— I don't know why. In 1956, after Rosemary and I were mar¬ ried, we needed money for furniture. I decided to try to write, in order to make something on the side. I’m still doing it. Thrust: I take it that was a no answer?’ Wolfe:! was thirtyish in 1965, when I was first published profes¬ sionally. I had been published by my college humor magazine in 1950, when I was nineteen. I started trying to write professionally in 1956 (November or December), when I was twenty-five. You would have to have lived through it to know what a long nine years that was. Thrust:With every writer, some time must come when they are staring at their latest check or list of sales and realize that writing could become a full-time occupation. At what point did that happen to Gene Wolfe? Wolfedt was probably when I sold Peace. Thrust: Any thoughts of freelancing on a full time basis? Wolfe:From time to time. No doubt I’ll do it sooner or later, but right now I have a son in college and another in high school. Of course, if I were fired tomorrow, I’d start tomorrow afternoon. Thrust: Do you have a preference between your short story col¬ lections? Wolfe: This must sound dumb; but no, I don’t. Both have some of my best stories, and some of my best stories are in neither — “The Detective of Dreams," for example, and “Westwind.” I would advise a reader, however, to buy Gene Wolfe’s Book of Days whenever he or she can find it. It seems to be awfully hard to get hold of. Thrust: Do you have a preference among recent short stories? Wolfe: Yes. “The Detective of Dreams,” which I just named. And for “A Criminal Proceeding, which no one seems to like but me, and “The God and His Man." Thrust: Some of your early pieces sold to Sir and Mike Shane's Mystery Magazine. Did you consciously begin, after these, to specialize in science fiction? Wolfe:No. When I thought of what I believed a good story, I wrote it and sent it to every place I thought might possibly take it. I wasted a lot of time and postage sen¬ ding sf, fantasy, and mysteries to places like Harpers. Thrust: Do you find that the skills you developed then are ap¬ plicable to longer prose forms? Wolfe: Yes, short story skills are applicable to novels. As Jack Woodford once wrote, “A short story is a story that is short. A novel is a story that is long." What is needed to write at various lengths — short story, novellette, novella, novel, and so forth — is a sense of space of each form. That sense can only be developed — so far as I know— by writing or attempting to write at the various lengths. However, a short-story writer can fake out a novel by plotting it in advance by episodes, writing the Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Page5 episodes, then linking them up. The novel will then be "episodic,” but some episodic novels are very good — I doubt that you'll have much trouble thinking of ex¬ amples. Thrust: Cheever’s Bullet Park, may be a good one. Let’s focus on your short stories. ’69-71 seem to have been good years for you. What changes were you experiencing in your writing then? Wolfe: I suspect that when you mention '69, 70, and 71 you are thinking of work published in those years rather than what was written in those years. So to set the record straight, let me list some of those stories; that way we’ll know more or less what we’re talking about. Let’s see: “Paul’s Treehouse,” “Remembrance to Come,” “Loco Parentis,” “Morning-Glory," “How the Whip Came Back," “The HORARS of War,” "Eyebem,” "The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories,” “Car Sinister.” Also: “Against the Lafayette Escadrille,” “Robot’s Story,” “The Packerhaus Method,” “Sonya, Crane Wesselman, and Kittee," "Of Relays and Roses.” And “Thou Spark of Blood,” “The Toy Theater,” and “King Linder the Moun¬ tain,” "A Method Bit in B.” Obviously this is a very mixed bag. Some of my best work, such as “The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories,” appeared in this three year stretch. So did a lot of my worst (“King Under the Moun¬ tain,” “Thou Spark of Blood"). Obviously (again) I was learning — but had not yet learned— the difference bet¬ ween a good story and a neat idea that could be ex¬ pounded in fiction and perhaps sold. The thing that strikes me more than anything about these is how short everything is. I would venture to say that there isn’t a story there that is more than 10,000 words. The best of them, IDDOS, is 7,000. The second best, “The Toy Theater,” is 2,200. I was in the process of discovering the limitations of the short story. In photographic terms, short stories are stills; novellas and novels are movies. Thrust: What were some of the background readings and stimuli that went into the creation of “The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories?” Wolfe:The only background reading I can recall for IDDOS was Wells and a mountain of pulps — all read years before. Thrust: What various character ideas, plot ideas, etc. came together to generate "The Death of Doctor Island?” Wolfe:Joe Hensley suggested, as a joke, that I do a story with that title after "The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories" lost the Nebula to No Award. I had been swapp¬ ing theories about thematic treatments, that means what I want it to mean right now, with Kate Wilhelm, and I decided to take Joe up— which I figured would blow his mind— and do a thematic inversion of the earlier story. I had had a very nice sort of little boy; I would have a very nasty sort; thus Tackie/Nicholas. I had had a doc¬ tor who looked like a villain; I would have one who was one but looked real good; thus Dr. Death/Dr. Island. I had had a real, somewhat gritty island on the Atlantic coast; I would have an artificial island on an artificial world; thus Settler’s Island/Doctor Island. And so on and so forth. I had just read an article about brain-splitting in Scientific American. It is incredible stuff, though as I understand it, further research tends to show that only right-handers are really that flakey in their mental con¬ struction. Us southpaws remain much more normal when our brains are cut in two. Thrust: Is the story “The Doctor of Death Island" a twist on the material generated in the previous two “Death” stories? Wolfe:Sure, that’s what made it so hard to write. Every so often, people suggest further variations on the Island of Dr. Death title. "Island of the Death Doctor,” “Doctor of the Island Death,” and so forth. But I did the first by switching around the plot elements of the second, and then "The Doctor of Death Island” by switching the first two. So in order to do a fourth story that would satisfy me, I would have to switch all three. I’m not sure I could do it, and I’m certain the end result wouldn’t be worth the effort. Thrust: Who were the first editors to show conviction to these earlier stories? Wolfe: First, and a long, long time before anyone else, Damon Knight, whom you know from Clarion. Later, Victoria Schochet and David G. Hartwell. I always liked Damon a great deal, and I still do. At the same time he frightened and irritated me. He frightened me because he is a ge¬ nuinely brilliant man who does not suffer fools gladly — who in fact would march them over the edge of a precipice, I suspect, if he could. And I am something of a fool at all times. He irritated me because he liked to sug¬ gest one word changes without giving a reason, and because he would never answer a question put to him in a letter. Our working relationship was enthusiastic and strained, if I may put it so. But as a writer, I owe more to Damon than anyone else, except possibly my mother. I will work with him again at the first opportunity, if he will let me. Thrust: Damon claims that the novella is a dying form, sadly I am sure. With such works as the “Death” stories, the “Cerberus” stories, “Forlesen,” “The Eyeflash Miracles," "Seven American Nights," do you still con¬ sider it worthwile writing novellas? Wolfe: Damon means it is ceasing to be commercially possi¬ ble, I think. Certainly it will always be artistically viable. The commercial demise of the novella is just a special case of the death of magazine fiction. Yes, of course I like writing novellas; I think writers nearly always do. Readers seem to prefer very short stories or very long books as a rule. The magazine novella, I suspect, was pretty much a compromise achieved by editors between the writers’ demands for the acceptance of longer work and the readers' demands for short stories. Thrust: Whose suggestion was it to market two thematically related original novellas with the “Fifth Head of Cerberus?” Wolfe: Norbert Slepyan’s. He was an editor then at Scribner’s. Thrust: Do you think it was a conceptual success? Wolfe: Yes Thrust: What about The Devil in a Forest? It is so non- traditional as a juvenile that it must have been a devil to label by Follett. Wolfe: Here comes the magic circle bit again. . .If by “label” you mean as a juvenile, as I think you do, hell no. Any book in which the protagonist is too young to vote is categorized as a juvenile almost automatically. Believe me, they knew what it was the moment they saw it. Have you read Huckleberry Finn? Nine times out of ten it is called a juvenile. I don't know if I’ll do another, not soon. I presently have a mystery going the rounds in which the protagonist is a teen-age girl, but that is laid in contem¬ porary America. Thrust: Will you try any more humor, like the award-nominated "How I lost the Second World War. . ." story? Books by Gene I4blfe Novels: OPERATION ARES, Berkley, 1969 THE FIFTH HEAD OF CERBERUS, Scribners, 1972 PEACE, Harper & Row, 1975 THE DEVIL IN A FOREST, Follett, 1976 THE SHADOW OF THE TORTURER, Simon & Schuster 1980 THE CLAW OF THE CONCILIATOR, Simon & Schuster, 1981 THE SWORD OF THE LICTOR, Simon & Schuster, 1982 THE CITADEL OF THE AUTARCH, Simon & Schuster, 1982 THE URTH OF THE NEW SUN, Simon & Schuster, forthcoming Collections: THE ISLAND OF DOCTOR DEATH AND OTHER STORIES, Pocket, 1980 THE BOOK OF GENE WOLFE, Doubleday, 1981 Page 6 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 Wolfe: I’ve never allowed my humorous side to fully appear in my work, since experience has convinced me that my humorous side will generally be greeted with fear and loathing. I suppose there are other directions I’m reluc¬ tant to pursue. The literary short story is one. There is almost no market at all until a writer gets to the point at which he can maneuver his publisher into putting out a collection. Thrust: Another important work was “The Hero as Werwolf.” What prompted you to write a piece sympathetic to a violent, cannibalistic murderer? Wolfe: When Tom Disch reviewed that story, he pointed out the missing E of werewolf on the end of my own name. I wasn’t conscious of that when I wrote the story, but I suspect he’s right. Werwolf is a valid old spelling. I used it to point up the fact that werewolf means “man-wolf." Wergild is the price of a man’s life. Note also that the protagonist of Peace is Alden Dennis Weer. I’ve always been conscious, you see, that I am neither exemplary nor popular, and every so often I try to tell my side of the story. Severian is a torturer, for that matter. Thrust: There is a point in the story where the corpse suddenly speaks, which prompted Terry Carr, in a Best-of Annual introduction, to recount an anecdote on your ability to surprise the reader. Wolfe: I wanted to show that the victim race was in fact superhuman. It was that fact that made Paul a hero, just as a man-eating tiger should be a hero among tigers. It had to be done early on in the story, and nothing is more superhuman than the power to reverse, if only slightly or temporarily, one’s own death. All the best surprises and wonders come about like that, growing from the material of the story itself when you’re willing to face the conse¬ quences of that material. Thrust: I found the material of Peace fresh and wondrous; was it autobiographical? Wolfe: Some, but not a lot. My father came from Logan, Ohio. I went there several times as a boy for more or less ex¬ tended visits, and lived there once for a year or so. Those memories gave me a great deal of background, but that was about the end of it. Thrust: Peace seems to be told by a sidhe, mentioned in the last pages of the book. As if some immortal creature lives by constantly reliving. What exactly is going on with Alden Weer? Wolfe: Weer is dead. In spirit, he is reliving his life, which he confuses with the house he built during his final years. Note that at the end of the book Miss Bold asks permis¬ sion to plant a tree on his grave. It is the fall of that tree, at the beginning of the book, that has freed his ghost — an old superstition. Thrust: A free-association question: what stands out in your memory at the mention of Operation Ares? Wolfe: The Laughter at Night, which was my own title for that book. Three years passed between the sale and the ap¬ pearance of Operation Ares; when it did appear, it was little noticed. I view it a journeyman work, about on par with the average paperback original. Thrust: Is there still room for the journeyman paperback original novel? Wolfe: I see a modest but real increase in market size, the decline of the horror novel —though there will always be room for a good anything— and more humor and science fantasy. Thrust: Do you see an untapped potential in the area of science fantasy? Wolfe: Of course. Science fantasy is about where science fic¬ tion was fifty years ago. I wouldn’t even want to guess at how big it may be. Thrust: Do you view The Book of the New Sun as a straight fan¬ tasy quest, or as a hybrid scientific fantasy? You have flyers and energy pistols in the first scene of The Shadow of the Torturer, matter transmission in The Claw of the Conciliator, and the full realization in The Sword of the Lictor that Agia, through Hector, employs alien creatures against Severian. Wolfe: I view The Book of the New Sun as science fantasy — by which I mean a science-fiction story told with the outlook, the flavor of fantasy. There are no fantasy elements involved — no “magic” in the fantasy sense. There is time-travel, but that belongs to sf, not fantasy. There are hypnotism, sleight of hand, and a few other things, but those belong to the world of reality, if not the world of science. Thrust: Then science fantasy has the burden of having to ex¬ plain the seemingly fantastic, or impossible. Are there subtle methods of doing this, other than an awkward ex¬ planatory lump at the end of a story? Wolfe: No, there isn’t. As long as you stick to explaining, you’re going to have that lump— at the end, in the middle, or in the beginning, which is where most writers seem to want to put it. The trick is to leave clues in the story that make an explanation unnecessary. I say “trick” because it isn’t easy, and there will always be some readers who don’t understand. Perhaps I might add that there are times when you want the lump. Typically these are in mystery or mystery-like stories in which the story turns on some character’s figuring things out and saying, “You see, Watson...” In science fiction and science fantasy these are fairly rare, but they do occur. For an example see the second scene in which Severian and Dorcas are in the room in the Duck’s Nest in The Sword of the Lictor. Thrust: Though there is a need to explain, or at least hint at, the origin of seemingly magic devices in a science fantasy, must there also be explanations of the creatures? For example, alzabo. Wolfe: I’m by no means sure I agree with the first statement. Certainly I do not feel that every creature must be ex¬ plained. The alzabo, like the averns, have been imported from another planet, just as the rabbit was brought into Australia from another continent. I doubt that an Australian writer would feel the need to deal with the rabbit's evolution. There are a good number of animals and plants that seem to have no place in the scheme of things and yet exist anyhow. The kiwi and the monkey- puzzle, for example. Thrust: Is there a body of work that gives roots to science fan¬ tasy? I can only think of Jack Vance. Wolfe: Yes, and like you I think of Vance first of all, particularly in The Dying Earth. But remember all those “ghost" stories in which the supernatural element proved in the end to be natural. They are science fantasy too, of a type. And how would you classify At The Earth’s Core? Or any other lost-race novel? Thrust: Or some of Verne’s shipwreck stories? I see that con¬ cept is sometimes as important as its handling in science fantasy. What were some of your initial concep¬ tions in constructing The Book of the New Sun? Wolfe: The idea of a torturer as hero, first of all. I began by casting my mind around for a truly unusual and fertile background, and came up with the notion of a boy raised in a dungeon where he ran errands for the torturers and eventually became one himself. That I recognized as a dramatic figure against a dramatic background, and I further recognized that the moral ambiguities of the position would provide any number of plot twists. With it I wanted to use the idea of the necropolis, and grave and tomb robbing. Thrust: And spiced freely with all that archaic terminology. An interesting recipe to work with. Were any of the terms in¬ vented? Wolfe: None. Some of the terms are Latin; others have been made by divesting Latin words of their endings — mostly in the case of extinct animals. Thrust: Each volume contains another unique feature: the stories within the story. What function do they perform? Wolfe: So many I doubt I can remember them all offhand. They Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 7 provide pacing — something that is very hard to explain but very important. A long story requires interludes bet¬ ween the periods of climatic action, and these in¬ terludes must not be dull and must contribute something of value. Stories within the story are one way of doing that. They prevent the reader from growing bored with a too-familiar cast; or at least, I hope they do. They act as dividers between parts of the action that should be divided. They shed light on the world in which the action is taking place. They reveal the character of the teller, in some instances. They sometimes reveal character by allowing me to show how someone reacts to them. They sometimes foreshadow. Dr. Talos’s play is an obvious example. Thrust: The New Sun works also have an unusual clarity that I don’t readily find in your earlier books. It is so visual, if that means anything. Wolfe: I don’t really know. I always try to suit the style of the story to the protagonist. Perhaps what you’re really see¬ ing is Severian’s straightforwardness, as opposed to someone like Number Five or Den. Thrust: Though Severian is no one but himself, were you con¬ sciously redefining fantasy traditions by fusing the wizard and the swordsman within his character? Wolfe: No. Severian isn’t really a wizard in any meaningful sense. Swordsman and savior, perhaps, but that is only to say, hero. A bit of a theurgist. Thrust: Then Severian represents a sort of divine interloper, rather than a magician. Wolfe: Can’t we find a spot midway? Theurgy is the work of a god, but a theurgist is one who ’’works” a god. A magi¬ cian compells spirits; a theurgist persuades them. Sup¬ pose that I found the First National Temporal Bank, with the slogan: “Your money available whenever you need it." Now if you were to deposit $100 next month, you could draw out $50 when you were seventeen. That’s what Severian does, I think. He has an account at FNT; you and I do not. Thrust: His talk with the undine in Claw. . .is very revealing of his past and future. Severian seems to have some con¬ trol over the immense and purposeful forces at work in his life. Wolfe: No direct control. He can be said to have indirect con¬ trol— if you like— because the forces are responding to his actions in an earlier timecycle; thus their actions “now” are shaped by his earlier ones. Thrust: What are some of the scenes that shape and define Severian, much like his observations shape and define the scenes of the books, or his past actions shape the present? Wolfe: The grave-side encounter with Vodalus first of all. The discussion with Thecla in which she will found a new religion. His encounter with the false Thecla in the House Azure. She is actually a clone of Thecla. Thrust: If Severian were standing in front of us, describe him externally and internally. Wolfe: You didn’t say at what point in his life, so I’ll choose him at the time he leaves the Citadel. He is 6’1”, and weighs 175 pounds. He is pale, with dark eyes, dark straight hair, and good teeth. His face is long and rather bony: high, square forehead, moderately high cheekbones, strong chin. He is muscular; his hands are a little larger than average. He wears heavy, black, knee-high leather boots, coarsely but strongly made; soot-black trousers of a fabric like soft wool; and a long, hooded cloak (unlin¬ ed) of the same material. He wears no shirt. Mentally he is an unconscious intellectual — that is to say, he is fascinated by ideas, including problems of ethics and morality, but he is not aware that he is an intellectual and for the most part he lacks the vocabulary. He is a great deal less like most men than he thinks he is. Even so, he knows himself to be alienated by his eidetic memory. Subsconsciously, he has been further marked by his loss of his mother in infancy. He has difficulty in forming relationships because of that, although he does sometimes form them, and he tends toward strong erotic attachments to women who subconsciously sug¬ gest the mother he lost. On the simplest level, this means toward women who are physically larger than he — Thea, Thecla, the undine— and to Jolenta, who has unusually large breasts. Of course, everyone is attracted to Jolenta, or at least nearly everyone. On a more subtle level he is attracted to women who act as guides, Agia, or counselors, Dorcas. Thrust: There must be special circumstances involved with giv¬ ing your viewpoint character eidetic memory. Wolfe: The great advantage is that he can plausibly recount in detail events that took place years ago, including just what was said, how someone dressed, and other such details. The disadvantage is the obvious one: he cannot plausibly forget, even when it might be convenient for me that he could. For example, when Severian was a boy running errands in the Citadel, I might have wanted him to get lost. But unless some special circumstance was involved, I couldn’t lose him, since he would remember every twist and turn he made. Thrust: Have you read other long fantastical series like Susan Cooper’s The Dark Is Rising; or C.S. Lewis, or Tolkien, etc.?They seem centered on good versus evil, whereas The Book of the New Sun seems to center on reality ver¬ sus illusion. Severian’s identity seems to be finding him, rather than he it. Wolfe: I haven’t read The Dark Is Rising. I have read the seven Narnia books and the Lewis series that begins with Out of the Silent Planet, as well as Until We Have Faces, Pilgrim’s Regress, and perhaps one or two other titles. And of course I have read The Lord of the Rings, as I sup¬ pose everyone who reads at all has by now. If I sound a little bitter, it is because I first the read the trilogy in 1956, when very few people had — in this country, at least. I spent a couple of months going around telling everyone what a great book it was and having them look at me as though I were mad. You didn’t mention Peake’s Gormenghast series, but I have read them too, and I suspect The Book of the New Sun is more like them than it is like Lewis’ work, or Tolkien’s. Certainly New Sun is about reality and illusion, but even more, it is about good vs. evil in the sense of moral choice. Any child can see that Strider is good and that the Black Riders are bad, and there are indeed times when life is like that — but there are not many times. In most cases we have to decide whether we will betray our trust and allow Thecla to die or remain faithful to it while she endures the torments of the damned. Do you remember Huck Finn on the raft, struggling with his conscience, which demanded that he return Jim to his owner? And how at last he went over entirely to evil? Thrust: So then the good vs. evil is caught up in Severian's identity quest. It is internalized, rather than externally evident in physical confrontations and clearly evil characters. At least for the most part. This makes Severian a truly haunting character then. Does he often enter your thoughts during non-writing times? An im¬ age. . .An action. . . Wolfe: Yes, he did and still does. What I am most conscious of, however, is not an image or an action but his mental presence, his personality. I am aware, in other words, of what he would think of whatever it is I am doing at the time. Thrust:Again, I see the stress on mental processes with Severian. Is he shaped from other characters you have read or worked with; or perhaps from people you have met? Wolfe:Not consciously. I made him up. I made up Thecla and Thea and Agia, and Agilus, Master Gurloes, and Abdiesus. Obviously I wouldn’t be able to make up PageB Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 people if I hadn’t met real people — no writer could. Thrust: Is then the setting of the tetralogy also made up, or do geographic and historical analogs exist for Severian’s Urth? Wolfe:The answer can only be yes to both. I made the setting, but I used elements from real places and periods. Maybe we should clarify the nomenclature a little. Urth is the planet. In the first four books, we never get out of Severian’s country, which is called the Commonwealth. There is a lot of Byzantium in the Commonwealth, and a lot of South America. Thrust: So you have a map of Severian’s trail, and world. Wolfe:When I was writing The Shadow of the Torturer, I made a sketch-map of Nessus, and when I was working on the early chapters of The Sword of the Lictor, I made a map of Thrax. I haven’t referred to either in a long time, and they may well be lost for good. I have a general map of the Commonwealth — mountains, pampas, Nessus, the isles of the south, and so on — in my head. I see no need to put that on paper. A simpler way of saying it would be to say that I know the course of Gyoll; when that is known, at least 90% of the country comes with it. I was an army cartographer in Korea after the cease-fire. Thrust: When did you know that you actually had material for more than one book, or for all four? Wolfe:That’s actually two questions; the answers are widely separated in time. I knew I had enough for more than one when I finished up what I had envisioned as the opening section of a novel and discovered that I had 200 + pages of manuscript. I knew I had enough for four when I finished what I had envisioned as the final book of a trilogy and discovered that it was a great deal thicker than the first two. I am working on a fifth book, by the way, The Urth of the New Sun. This at the urgent request of David Hartwell, who wanted me to wind up some matters not covered in the fourth. Thrust: Will the fifth book be different from the other four in style, technique, or other significant wavs? SForum a new, bi-monthly magazine of science fiction commentary and review, is now soliciting contributions and subscrip- SForum will begin publication this fall with a Preview Issue which is now being assembled. Already lined up are articles and reviews by Joe L. Hensley, Michael Macomber, Scott E. Green, Kevin J. Anderson, Diane C. Donovan, Timothy Finn, and others. The unnumbered Preview Issue is $2 by itself. Subscribe to the first volume (6 issues) for $12 and get the Preview Issue free. SForum needs articles, reviews, and poetry on every facet of science fiction. Payment is per word upon publication for articles and reviews; for poetry, pay¬ ment is $1 per poem or !-2$ per word, whichever is greater. Artwork also wanted. Query with samples; payment varies. Write to: Guy M. Townsend, Editor SForum 1711 Cliffy Drive Madison, IN 47250 Wolfe:Not in style or technique. As for the last, what’s signifi¬ cant? The real difference is that the first four were com¬ pleted before Urth was begun. It’s a coda, outside the main framework. It will concern Severian’s trial by the “gods” of his universe, his trial as representative of the people of Urth. Also the coming of the new sun. Thrust: When you revealed that Dorcas was revived from the dead, I somehow knew this was right. You had planted the truth within the book, and concealed it. Is the fifth book meant to reveal such truths that are assumed in the fabric of the first four books? Wolfe:Not specifically or principally, but some of that will take place. I couldn’t prevent it if I wanted to, and I don’t. Thrust: So then it becomes a myth-making. Wolfe: It is a solar myth, perhaps the most common kind of all. I don’t mean that Severian is Ra or Apollo — but then Ra isn’t Apollo, either, and neither of them are Arthur. For the origins of this sort of thing, we have to look for the origins of mankind itself. As some tribe— probably not wholly human — wandered across the land, there came a time when winter was frighteningly severe. It seemed the sun had vanished for good, and with it, life as well as light. No doubt every sort of magic we can imagine, and many we can’t imagine, was tried in the hope of bringing it back, particularly the lighting of small fires. Some authorities say that the bon in bonfire is the French word meaning “good;" others that it is the same as bone. Certainly bones were burned in English bonfires well into historic times, and there is no reason, as Chesterton has pointed out, that it cannot be both. The bones of the sacrifice, the man Graves calls the Sun King, are burned in the good fire to rekindle the sun. To circle about to your mention of reality and illusion, may I point out that the Aztec sun-god’s name was, literally, Smoking Mirror ? Solar myth is tied to reality-unreality from the beginning. Where there is sunlight, there is my shadow. Is my shadow real? Is it my soul? Dunsany’s The Charwomen's Shadow. Where there is sunlight there is reflection in water. Is that a second soul? If we make a golden image of the sun, we see our own faces therein. Are they still ours? Thrust: Ancient ontology? Wolfe:Today we do not think we regard these questions as serious or difficult, but they are bred in the bone. If there is such a thing as a collective unconscious, you can be sure they will be found there. Thrust: And certainly within Severian’s unconscious. Perhaps we could end this by telling something about Severian which doesn’t end up in the books. Wolfe: There was the time when Severian encountered assas¬ sins in the Secret House who had come to kill Ymar, an autarch a chiliad dead. I may write about that sometime. And the year he spent as a slave of the Ascians. But I doubt that either will make it into print. Thrust: Any other works of science fantasy from Gene Wolfe? Wolfe: I’m sure, but I don’t know yet what they will be. I have nothing specific planned. EDITORIAL (cont.) hibiting his usual audacity, does an indepth prescient review of Contact, Carl Sagan’s upcoming science fiction novel. Effinger draws the logical analogies between betting football and writing sf. Charles’ newest novel is His Brother’s Keeper, out in paperback from Ace, and George’s newest novel is The Wolves of Memory, in paperback from Berkley. Next Issue: In our 11th year of publication, planned for Thrust #20 is: an interview with Michael Bishop by David Pettus, “Looking Back: My Life in Science Fiction" by Charles D. Hormg, a look at the ill-fated history of The Last Dangerous Visions by Gregory Feely, and possibly a piece by Terrence Green on academic sf conferences. Plus, of course, the results of the Second Annual Thrust Awards. Remember to vote!! -DDF Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 9 "Even in its commercial history in the United States, dating from the early years of the century, it [SF] has undergone repeated infusions from other kinds of fiction— dime-novel fiction beginning about 1900, pulp adven¬ ture fiction in the early thirties, slick fiction in the late thirties and forties, women’ s-magazine and little-magazine fiction in the early fifties, avant-garde fiction in the sixties and seven¬ ties. Every one of these transformations has provoked cries of outrage from old-guard editors and writers, but not one of them has obliterated previous forms— the latter are all still alive, even the Gernsbackian story. . .Adventure SF, now more than forty years old, accounts for more than half the science fiction on the newsstands." — Damon Knight, " What Is Science Fiction?" from Turning Points "Healy and McComas were about the first to assert, in the introductory material to the heavily influential Adventures in Time and Space anthology, that there was true linearity from Gernsback to Campbell. They had to do that, if there was going to be an "old science fiction" to validate their coining of the terms "modern science fiction" and "Golden Age" as synonymous with Campbellianism. But there is no more true linearity there than there is in the weathervaning and erratic transmogrification that have marked Amazing’s history as a commercial property. Astounding was more descended from the fact that it could survive only by deviating from the Gernsbackian mode! than it was from any attempt at emula¬ tion." — Algis Budrys, F&SF, November 1977 "A revolution was inevitable against the cold inhumanity of a viewpoint which could equate the Vietnam war with Wat Tyler's Rebellion, discrimination with serfdom, individual tragedy with the crushing of a cockroach; which would con¬ sider mass starvation as a possible long-term good, plague as a genetic boon and humanitarianism as genetic suicide, and war as a means of redressing Malthusian imbalances. . . science fiction’s penchant for the long view ultimately created a new brand of writers who focused their concerns on the short term, on individuals rather than their intellects." —James Gunn, Alternate Worlds "What you hold in your hands is more than a book. If we are lucky, it is a revolution. " — Harlan Ellison, Introduction to Dangerous Visions, 1967 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 By the mid-sixties, a turbulent new age was about to ex¬ plode into public consciousness, and an evolutionary influx of new writers with new approaches was just about to be translated into a “literary movement,” into a “revolution,” whether the writers involved liked it or not (some did, some didn’t). The floodgates were about to open on a torrent of hysterical propaganda, exagerated claims, grim warnings, dire threats, gloomy predictions, self-serving hype, revolutionary rhetoric, PR flack, pretentious proclamations, personal abuse, and all imaginable forms of hotheaded critical nonsense from both sides of what would come to be called (in Pohl's phrase) “The War of the New Wave.” Even today, more than ten years later, it is difficult to get any two commentators to agree upon just what did happen dur¬ ing “The War of the New Wave,” let alone get them to agree who won it, or what the long-term aftereffects of it have been. Compounding the difficulties of understanding this period is the fact that the "New Wave” revolution looks very different in¬ deed depending on which side of the Atlantic you are looking at it from— on the English side of the Atlantic, for instance, it is gospel that the major writer of the New Wave was J.G. Ballard, and that its chief nourisher and architect was Michael Moorcock at New Worlds magazine, a figure of almost god-like importance and singularity, and this is the viewpoint that, in the main, has been reflected in the critical histories of this period that have been published to date (in Nicholl’s recent— and excellent— The Science Fiction Encyclopedia, for instance, where 365 lines of text are devoted to Moorcock, as opposed to 299 lines devoted to Heinlein). Back again on this side of the Atlantic, however, things looked— and look— very different. My own feeling is that while Moorcock and Ballard were vital to the development of the New Wave in Britain, they simply did not play as significant a role on the American side of the Atlantic. Although I appreciated some of Ballard’s work, for instance, there were easily a dozen other writers whose work I found more exciting and influential. While Ballard’s early work, most notably his “Vermillion Sands” stories, can be shown to have had a demonstrable effect on American writers, strongly influencing susequent series such as Edward Bryant’s “Cinnabar" stories and Lee Killough’s "Aventine” stories, Ballard’s more difficult later work was much much more influential on the British New Wave than it was on the majority of American readers and writers. His series of “condensed novels” in New Worlds magazine, for instance, aroused little enthusiasm in the American audience, even among most of the progressives and intellectuals, and in fact the rather drastic slump in Ballard’s critical reputation in America during the seventies can be traced to the beginning of his “condensed novel” period, during which time he produced work a bit too fiercely avant-garde even for most of those American readers who had appreciated Ballard’s earlier ex¬ perimental pieces like “The Terminal Beach.” As for Moorcock, at the beginning of the “New Wave” period, I knew him not at all, except as the author of a series of rather overwrought sword & sorcery tales, and when I did discover his contem¬ porary work, much of it left me cold — I have always felt a par¬ ticular dislike for Moorcock’s ubiquitous character Jerry Cor¬ nelius, for instance, although Moorcock’s own early Cornelius stories were nowhere near as pretentious and self-indulgent as the Jerry Cornelius stories later produced by other members of the New Worlds stable. Later I would come to develop a good deal of respect for some of Moorcock’s work— notably Gloriana and his brilliant Dancers at the End of Time sequence— but by then we would be well into the seventies. As for Moorcock’s editorial work, when I did become aware of it in the late sixties (I was living in Europe at the time), I found that it was also, in the main, not to my taste, that I disagreed more often than not with both the editorial direction and aesthetic prejudices of New Worlds; I later found that New Worlds Quarterly, the reincarnation of New Worlds as an anthology series, was more to my taste (several important stories appeared there, most notably ex¬ cellent work by Keith Roberts such as “The Grain Kings,” “The God House,” and the superlative "Weihnactsabend”), but again, by that time the "New Wave” period was already long over. Editorially, Frederik Pohl, Damon Knight, Terry Carr, Cele Goldsmith, and, yes, even Donald Wollheim, were easily more important to the development of the American New Wave than Moorcock. Thus it seems clear to me that the British New Wave and the American New Wave were from the start two different animals, of the same genus perhaps, but definitely not of the same species. To argue which of them is “better” is a pointless exercise, as they are as different as apples and oranges, each with its own distinct and sometimes sharply-differing sets of values and goals. To confuse the two, and speak of the “New Wave” as if there were no distinction and no difference bet¬ ween what happened on either side of the Atlantic, as some critics have, is, at the very least, misleading— at worst, it makes understanding of the period nearly impossible. For although the two “New Wave” movements did influence each other, particularly toward the tag-end of the sixties (American writers like Disch and Delany can be seen to have been heavily influenced, for both better and worse, by New Worlds aesthetics during the last few years of the decade; while during the same period, it often seemed, paradoxically, that it was the expatriate American writers like Disch, Spinrad, Delany, John Sladek, James Sallis, and Pamela Zoline who were providing much of the excitement and driving spirit of New Worlds itself), they have also remained — and remain — isolated in many key aesthetic ways. In this anthology then, and in these notes, which are unabashedly biased, I plan to focus primarily on the American New Wave and its literary descendants. The English side of the story will have to be told by someone with much more direct knowledge of this period than I possess— and indeed, much of the English perspective on this period can be found in books such as Aldiss’ Billion Year Spree, Nicholls’ The Science Fic¬ tion Encyclopedia (in particular the entries on the New Wave, Moorcock, and Ballard), Holdstock’s Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (particularly the section on the New Wave), the editorial comment in Spinrad’s Modern Science Fiction and The New Tomorrows, and Brian Ash’s Visual Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (particularly George Turner’s article “Science Fiction as Literature”); it tends to be the American side of the story that has, to date, been skimped. (For those who care, I tend to disagree more with Turner, Holdstock, and Spinrad than I do with Clute, Nicholls, and Aldiss. For a solid middle-of-the-road analysis of the New Wave period see James Gunn’s Alternate Worlds and his critical anthology The Road to Science Fiction, Vol. 3; Gunn would probably disagree with both the English critics and me more often than not. Reactionary views of this period of varying degrees of extremity also exist, notably in Blish’s More Issues At Hand, Wollheim’s The Universe Makers, and Lester del Rey’s The World of Science Fiction; I find a number of points of agreement with Blish, far fewer with Wollheim and del Rey.) Although the roots of the American New Wave can be ultimately traced back to Campbell’s Golden Age "revolution”, (something that is by no means always true— or even mostly true— of the British New Wave), with hindsight it is easy to see that most of the American New Wave of the late sixties was reacting directly to or against the H.L. Gold-inspired Galaxy- style SF of the fifties, which in its turn had evolved as a reac¬ tion to and against the Campbellianism of the forties. Many of the new writers of the sixties, unlike the new writers of the fif¬ ties, were not long-term fans, and were unfamiliar with Golden Age and pre-Golden Age material; they tended to think of Galaxy-style SF as the mainstream of SF— indeed, the Camp- bellian influence on American New Wave authors was often almost entirely second-ftand, deriving from the influence Campbellinism had had on the various Galaxy-era writers. With this in mind, it is fairly easy to pick out those writers of the fifties who were the most influential to the writers of the sixties, the direct “ancestors” of the American New Wave, so to speak (although it must be remembered that the New Wave authors also claimed to have been influence by a wide range of Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 11 “mainstream” authors, everyone from William Burroughs to Huysmans, in addition to SF writers I am about to list). For my money, the major “New Wave ancestors" were Theodore Sturgeon, Alfred Bester, Ray Bradbury, Philip K. Dick, Fritz Leiber, and Cordwainer Smith — with lesser but still important influences form C.M. Kornbluth, Damon Knight, Algis Budrys, Robert Sheckley, William Tenn, Arthur C. Clarke, A.E. Van Vogt, Brian W. Aldiss, Charles L. Harness, Edgar Pangborn, Avram Davidson, and the 1950s Heinlein of the Scribner “juveniles” and “All You Zombies.” If I had to pick the single most influen¬ tial author, I would, with some hesitation, pick Sturgeon; if I had to pick the single most influential SF novel, I would, with somewhat less hesitation, pick Bester’s The Stars My Destina¬ tion. It is worth noting again that some of these writers, in par¬ ticular Sturgeon, Heinlein, and Leiber, were actually inf luencial twice: once indirectly through the effect their pre-war work had on the new writers of the fifties like Knight, Budrys, Bradburry, and Sheckley, and the second time directly with their own post-war work in the Galaxy-era. If you accept this list of "ancestors", even partially (and the influence of, at the very least, Sturgeon, Bester, Leiber, and Bradbury can be pinpointed with almost inarguable clarity in the work of many of the new writers of the sixties), then it can be seen that the American New Wave was solidly set in its own distinct aesthetic direction long before the Moorcockian in¬ fluence became vital on this side of the Atlantic. That direction would become obscured by the chaos surrounding the end of the New Wave era, and would not become obvious again until the late middle seventies, when another generation of new writers— most notably Haldeman, Benford, and Varley, sup¬ ported by a strongly resurgent Pohl and Budrys— would arrive to set up signposts in the wilderness. I have been blithely using the term "New Wave," because it is convenient, because it was the term utilized at the time, and because it is a term that has come to be historically accepted— and yet in many ways it would be possible to make an excellent argument that the “New Wave," as such, never existed at all. Almost all of the hew writers who rose to prominence in the middle sixties were lumped together and jammed into a pigeonhole labelled "New Wave", where they were even less comfortable together than critically pigeonholed writers usual¬ ly are. Many of these so-called “New Wave” authors were not even familiar with each other’s work, many didn’t like each other's work when they were familiar with it, and their literary goals and tastes spanned the usual spectrum. Conscious literary "revolutionaries” were rare, close-knit coteries were few (as a minor member of the infamous “Milford Mafia” dur¬ ing the late sixties and early seventies, I can testify that it mostly did not exist, as demonstrated by the contemptuous ease with which the reactionary backlash movement of the ear¬ ly middle seventies came to dominate the SF world), and the few consciously "revolutionary” coteries that did exist (it is tempting to imagine them solemnly drinking a toast, shouting “Down with old-fashioned Campbellian science fiction!” and throwing their glasses into the fireplace) got along no better in- tersticially than they did with the other writers jammed shoulder to shoulder into the “New Wave” pigeonhole. Mean¬ while, many of the older writers pretended that there was such a thing as an opposing, shoulder-to-shoulder Old Wave or Old Guard, and that they were card-carrying members of it, although many of them also disliked or were unfamiliar with each other's work, and there was an equal superfluidity of tastes and goals among them, many diametrically opposed. From the perspective of the eighties, it is easy to see that SF was about to change, change dramatically, but that the change was inevitable and evolutionary— arising independently from dozens of different sources— rather than, in the main, a self- willed "revolution." It was “steam-engine time,” in Charles Fort's phrase, and although the demagogues undoubtedly speeded up the process with their fiery rhetoric and unabash¬ ed hype, change would eventually have come anyway. One demonstration of this is that although it was easy enough even then to prove that the New Wave as such did not exist, the public insisted on reacting as if it did exist. And so the generally accepted perception of what the New Wave was became the “reality,” irregardless of the facts, because it filled a historic role that needed to be filled. But what was it that was new about the new writers of the sixties? For in spite of the strong influence of the Galaxy-era writers, they were not just second-generation Sturgeons and Besters— there had been a break, a quantum jump, a sea- change. Some commentators have claimed that the New Wave’s primary accomplishment was to bring a heightened awareness of style and emphasis on literary polish to SF, but this is surely an oversimplification — people had written SF with a high degree of literacy, passion, and intelligence long before the New Wavers came along, and stylistically there was little the new writers of the sixties did that was beyond the range, poten¬ tially at least, of Sturgeon or Budrys or Knight. Other commentators have said that the primary difference between the New Wave authors and their predecessors was the New Waver’s literary sophistication, their knowledge of “mainstream” and “avant-garde” techniques not known to the writer-engineers of Campbell’s Golden Age. Again, there is some truth to that, but again it is not all of the truth by any means. Certainly it can be argued that at least some of the writers of the fifties— Robert Silverberg, for instance, or James Blish, or C.M. Kornbluth — were every bit as erudite and widely-read as later writers like Delany and Zelazny and Russ, and I strongly suspect that even some of Campbell’s writer- engineers were a good deal more sophistipated than they are usually given credit for being — De Camp is an expert in many academic fields, for instance, and Lester del Rey is an authori¬ ty on Finnegan’s Wake. No, the new writers of the sixties were not necessarily bet¬ ter educated, smarter, more serious, more ambitious, bolder, or more literalty-ad roit than earlier writers, but they possessed a different — sometimes radically different — perspective on the world, and that perspective, that attitudinal change, permeated their work. One reason for the new perspective was that the new writers were, literally and demographically, new people. It is a simplification to say that the SF of Campbell's Golden Age was written by and for white, middle-class, educated, technologically-oriented males, but after all the ex¬ ceptions that can be made are noted and numbered, it remains, like many simplifications, more true than not. Writing was not even the prefered career of most of the Golden Age giants, but a second-choice, something they came to settle for, or, at most, an interesting hobby, something thay had fallen into almost accidentally. Given their druthers (and a more con¬ ducive economic situation than that of the Great Depression years), Campbell and De Camp would have been engineers, Heinlein a career naval officer, and so on. (There is an in¬ teresting comparison to be made here to the giants of the Black Mask stable of mystery writers— Raymond Chandler, who had been an oil company executive before bankrupcy forc¬ ed him to turn to writing, and Dasheiel Hammett, who would have much rather continued his career as a Pinkerton operative, but whose ill-health drove him to be a writer instead.) Campbell has even testified that he often had to tempt Heinlein into writing at all by inflaming Heinlein’s desire for some expensive luxury item that Heinlein otherwise couldn’t afford. There is a subtle but real difference between this at¬ titude and the attitudes of writers of the fifties like Anderson and Silverberg who could have gone on to pursue careers in the fields they had trained for, but who instead decided that it was more fun to write SF for a living — and there is the same kind of difference again, for both better and worse, between that at¬ titude and the attitude of the kids of the sixties and seventies who deliberately set out to become SF writers, and who regard¬ ed whatever jobs they held along the way— working in a stirrup-buckle factory, running the Tubs of Fun at an amuse¬ ment park, being a shrimp-boat fisherman, and so on— as ex¬ pedients to keep the money coming in while they wrote. The new writers of the sixties and early seventies were for the most part not engineers or physicists or hardcore technical Page 12 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 people. Many came instead from a background of the liberal arts and the humanities, some were classically educated, some had established successful careers in non-technical fields, others thought of themselves primarily as artists, with SF— and indeed, the written word — only one of the many areas in which they were interested in working. The tradition of SF writers coming up through organized SF fandom would also break down almost completely during the sixties — it had nur¬ tured several generations of SF writers, from the Futurians in the forties to writers like Silverberg and Ellison in the fifties, but for the most part the new writers of the sixties were not fans; many of them had not even suspected the existence of organized fandom before breaking into professional print, and many remain suspicious of it to this day. (Curiously, this trend would reverse sharply in the middle seventies, with writers like Joe Haldeman, Jack C. Haldeman, George R.R. Martin, Tom Reamy, Howard Waldrop, Phylliss Eisenstein and many others coming up through fandom in the traditional way and remain¬ ing strongly involved with it after they had become profes¬ sionals.) Some of the new writers would not even be white, or middle-class, or male— there have always been women who write SF (Leigh Brackett, C.L. Moore, and Andre Norton are on¬ ly the most prominent of the examples that spring to mind), but the properties of working women writers would jump sharply at the end of the sixties and keep going steadily up throughout the seventies; many of the new women writers would also em¬ brace attitudes, values and social philosophies markedly dif¬ ferent from those advocated — at least in print — by most of the older women professionals. The new writers were new people, different kinds of peo¬ ple, and so inevitably they looked at the world through new eyes. By the mid-sixties, there was also such a thing (in fact if not in name) as a "counterculture”— the same social forces that were shaping the microcosm — and thus, almost by defini¬ tion, a different perspective now available than any that authors sunk in the conventions and viewpoints of the mainline culture had been able to obtain, for all their in¬ telligence, talent, and erudition; or at least, to be fair, than any perspective they had been able to get into print (Leiber in the late fifties and early sixties would write a number of stories from strong “counterculture” perspectives that he would be unable to sell for a decade or more). James Blish, for instance, once wondered how two men of such radically disparate backgrounds as Delany and Zelazny could share such similarities in their approaches to SF— the answer, or one of the answers, is that as products of their own times they both shared the view from that suddenly-extant different social perspective, to one degree or another. Suddenly assumptions and values were being questioned that no one had ever thought of questioning before. To many of the Old Guard, this would be perceived as a deliberately perverse and spiteful attempt to put “dirty words” and descrip¬ tions of sexual and excretory functions into SF. The New Wave writers would see it as an attempt to break down the outdated 19th-century taboos that were strangling magazine SF, demanding the right to address an audience of intelligent adults, rather than the squimish and doggedly virginal fourteen-year-old boys that many editors firmly believed made up the entirety of their readership. Many of the new writers took such artistic freedom for granted, and were shaken, dismayed, and furiously-exasperated to realize how regressive the situation in the SF publishing world could be. Others— like the “New” Silverberg — had chaffed under such restrictions for years; it was impossible for me to read the scene in the 1971 Galaxy serialization of The World Inside in which Jason Quevedo chants “Fuck. Cunt. Fuck. Cunt. Fuck.” without fan¬ cying the character also thinking incredulously to himself, look what I’m getting away with saying in Galaxy! Conservative critics— even sophisticates like Blish — also protested, somewhat petulantly, that the new writers were overwriting, but in a way it was that very overwriting, that flam¬ boyance and arrogance, that we— my generation— admired about them. We admired Zelazny's good-natured effrontery and easy ostentation, the risks he took in pursuit of eloquence without ruffling a hair, the grace and nerve he displayed as he switched from high-flown pseudo-Jacabean to wisecracking Chandlerian slang to vivid prose-poetry to Hemingwayesque starkness in the course of a few lines — we loved him for it, as one loves the unruffled aristocrat who makes the most difficult of tasks look easy and effortless and free. We loved Delany for his outrageous mixture of cosmic space-opera schticks with the most subtle of philosophies and metaphysics, for the in¬ tensity and poetry of his prose, for his vivid and psychologically-complex characterizations, for his great erudi¬ tion and strong social consciousness, for his radical insight in¬ to the workings of social systems, and most of all for the feel¬ ing we got from him — more strongly than from anyone else— that here was the authentic view from the other side, a perspective that we had never known ourselves, the epitomiza- tion of our own feelings that something was moving and changing in the world outside. We loved Ellison for his raw chutzpah and grit, his deliberate taboo-breaking and bear- baiting, the mean streets he took us down. We loved Lafferty for the sheer wonderful brass it took to give characters names like Aloysius Shiplap, Willy McGilly, Diogenes Pontifex or Basil Bagelbaker and get away with it, for his outlandish and richly- strange imagination, for the bizareness of concept, sly verve of execution, and strong shaggy humor of stories like “Narrow Valley,” “Thus We Frustrate Charlemagne,” “Slow Tuesday Night,” “The Hole on the Corner,” and "Hog-Belly Honey,” some of the freshest and funniest short SF ever written. It was a time for risk-taking, and those who took them were admirable. The official starting gun of the War of the New Wave in America is usually thought of as the publication of Harlan Ellison’s monumental, taboo-breaking, bear-baiting, nose- thumbing nyahh-nyahhnyahhing anthology Dangerous Vi¬ sions in 1967; the last serious shot to be fired was probably sometime in 1973 or 74 when the whole issue died from ennui while slogging through the dull and spiritually-numbing morass of the Elwood Era in SF. In between, for at least five or six years, the tempest inside the teapot microcosm of SF reflected the turmoil of the national macrocosm outside. As riots and peacemarches tore the country apart, and as the Vietnam war continued to escalate, critics like Aldiss would call for more stories dealing with Vietnam, the youth revolution, the ecology, the psychedelic scene, and so forth, and Moorcock would issue his famous demand for “total freedom — real sex, real drugs, really shocking ideas about society.” Actually, few stories, even those by the extreme ex¬ perimentalists, dealt with those issues in any successful organic way as SF. “Youth revolution”/"psychedelic”/ “Amerika rampant” stories quickly developed a language of cliches, oversimplifications and conventions all their own, and by the mid-seventies had degenerated into what we used to call “West Coast Paranoia Stories,” a sub-genre as dependent on formula as the classic Campbellian puzzle story. Good stories about drugs and the psychedelic experience were ex¬ tremely rare— in fact, once you have mentioned Dick, Spinrad, Silverberg, Disch, Leiber, Delany, Moorcock, Aldiss, and Nor¬ man Kagen, you have almost exhausted the roster of SF authors who have handled the subject with any sort of insight, authenticity, or complexity of understanding. Most the SF stories that dealt directly with the Vietnam War, from either the hawk or dove perspective, were failures, foundering under the weight of their own polemic and inept clumsy propagandiz¬ ing— only those writers who first assimilated the experience and then extrapolated from it (Haldeman’s The Forever War, Dick’s “Faith of Our Fathers,” Delany's Babel-17 and The Towers of Toronto, Leiber’s "America the Beautiful,” Tiptree’s “Beam Us Home,” Wilhelm's “The Planners,” Aldiss’s “Total Environment,” Wolfe’s “Feather Tigers,” and Dann’s “Among the Mountains,” are the examples that come most immediately to mind) were able to deal in genuinely science-fictional terms with the thematic material of the war. By the early seventies, ecological-doom stories had become so common, so Byronic, Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 13 the despair In which they luxuriated so unrelieved, that Lafferty started off his 1972 story “Incased in Ancient Rind” with a wry "Aw, dog dirt, not another air pollution piece.” Hysteria continued to mount within SF throughout the late sixties and early seventies. J.J. Pierce agitated for a jihad to push the degenerate New Wavers into the sea and purify the bloodlines of SF. Poul Anderson made his famous "sniveling faggot” remark— "science fiction. . .remains more interested in the glamour and mystery of existence, the survival and triumph and tragedy of heroes and thinkers, than in the neuroses of some sniveling faggot”— and Jim Sallis retaliated by sending him an anonymous mash note on scented lavender paper. Samuel Delany, in a Quark editorial, named Robert Heinlein the “enemy” of good speculative fiction. The editorials and reviews in New Worlds and New Worlds Quarter¬ ly became increasingly bitter and extreme, and began to demonstrate a sort of foaming-at-the-mouth vituperativeness. The SF field, long known for its clannishness and bonhomie, was sundered, publicly sundered, during those years as never before. The peak of the division probably came in 1968, when over 100 SF writers laid out their own money to take out two full-page ads in the major SF magazines, one in support of government policy on Vietnam, the other in opposi¬ tion to it. Those few writers who wished to remain neutral found that they had to fight the tremendous pressures that were being applied to sweep them into one camp or the other. Even the normally level-headed Frederik Pohl was sufficiently swept away by the hysteria of the times to propose (in the same issue of Galaxy that contained the pro- and anti-Vietnam ads) a write-in contest for the best solution to the Vietnam Pro¬ blem; the winning proposals, we were solemnly told, would be forwarded to the Pentagon — I was in the Army overseas at the time, and those of us who read that particular issue of Galaxy all had a good laugh over that one. With all this huggermugg^r going on, few noticed the in¬ herent contradictions in the whole New Wave-Old Wave dualism, a dualism that was taken as an article of faith by Young Turks and Old Pros alike. But: Damon Knight, who was considered the High Priest of the New Wave in America all throughout this period, rejected from Orbit the best short work of Delany, Zelazny, Tiptree, Niven, and Silverberg, while at the same time publishing other stories by Wolfe, Wilhelm, Disch, Russ, Emshwiller, Lafferty, and myself that probably would not have been accepted by any other commercial market in the country. Donald Wollheim, considered during the same period to be one of the major leaders of the reactionary forces in SF, published the early novels of Delany, Zelazny, Le Guin, Disch, and Dick when no one else would touch them. Frederik Pohl was beating the editorial drums against the New Wave and simultaneously publishing stories by Dick, Lafferty, Tiptree, Niven, Smith, Ellison, Silverberg, Zelazny, and Delany that would in retrospect seem almost the core of the movement; at the same time, Pohl was, with Worlds of If, not only editing by far the most experimental SF magazine in the country, but pro¬ viding the only feasible commercial American market for stories like Ellison's "I have No Mouth and I Must Scream,” Delany's superlative “The Star Pit,*” and Zelazny’s execrable “Creatures of Light and Darkness" — nevertheless, Pohl was one of the most vehemently anti-New Wave spokesman on the scene. Robert Heinlein, the dean of Campbellian SF and the darling of the conservative wing— a figure who by now was viewed by the New Wavers in much the same way John Wayne was seen by the counterculture, as a sort of archetypically-vile bugbear— was turning out rambling, virtually-plotless, non¬ rigorous, pretentious, and boring novels stuffed with seamy sophomoric titilation and polymorphic-perverse sexual ex¬ perimentation— in short, the sort of books that people like J.J. Pierce accused the New Wavers of turning out, but which, in that pre-Dhalgren era, very few of them ever actually had. Even today, conservatives still blanch and cross themselves at the mention of Spinrad’s Bug Jack Barron, and yet compared to I Will Fear No Evil it is a straightforward slam-bang adventure ■Actually in Pohl’s Worlds of Tomorrow, but It amounted to the same thing. novel, and, in fact, is closer to the traditional storytelling values of SF (and even of Campbellian SF) than Heinlein’s static yawn of a book— it even contains less emphasis on sex (if far heavier proportion of four-letter words) than I Will Fear No Evil, and all the sex depicted, unlike that in the Heinlein novel, is conventional one-on-one heterosexuality. That loath¬ ed and pointed-at epitome of the New Wave story, Ellison’s “A Boy and His Dog," is full of shootings, stabbings, bludgeon¬ ings and rape, and moves along as briskly and straightforward¬ ly as anything by A.A. Craig. If anyone noticed any of these contradictions at the time, no one said anything about them. But when the dust had settled and the War was as much over as such wars ever get, it became obvious that something unexpected had happened, and that — in spite of the fact that the reactionary elements in SF spent the early years of the seventies dancing around the ring Muhammad Ali-style and chanting “we won! we won!” — neither side could claim a clearcut or unambiguous victory: both Young Turks and Old Pros were still around, neither had been driven from the marketplace (a fate each side had threatened the other with at one time or another), and if the New Wave’s Millenium had not * arrived, neither had SF returned to that pristine Campbellian purity that the Old Guard looked back to with longing nostalgia (and very selective memories). SF had changed, irrevocably, in ways that few had foreseen. In Pohl's words, from his introductipn to The Best of C.M. Kornbluth: “ Cyril [Kornbluth] died before the Wars of the New Wave began. I am not sure which side he would have taken. . .In a sense, I don't think his choice of sides would have made much difference. I don’t think it really did for any of us. “ A fundamental characteristic of most wars is that nobody wins them. It seems to me that the War of the New Wave was unique — everybody won. The old stalwarts learned how to break free of the formal pulp structure. The New Wavers learned— or at least the educable ones learned— how to in¬ clude some of the special content of SF, which is irreplaceably valuable, in their experiments with form and style. “All of us learned something from the New Wave. I know I did. . . It he [Kornbluth] were writing now he might not choose between being poet and science-fiction writer. He might at the same time be both. ” In Blish’s words: “It [the New Wave] was a lively old thing while it lasted, fill¬ ing the local air with shrieks, boasts, counter-crusades, slander, flying glassware, wet firecrackers, propaganda, dead horses, sitting ducks, non-issues, straw men, tin gods, and millions of words of unreadable prose. It also fertilized the pro¬ duction of a surprisingly large number of works of genuine merit, plus a lot of experimentation which even at its worst jar¬ red many people into rethinking their critical stances. “Willy-nilly, we have had a revolution, and it cannot be un¬ done. ” It has become plain, looking back from the beginning of the eighties, that if the New Wave had never existed— as some of its detractors would like to pretend it did not— SF would be infinite¬ ly worse off today. There was no path from the stagnant SF of the early sixties to the strongly resurgent SF of the late seventies save through the chaos, triumph, disaster and despair of the late sixties and early seventies. Like many births, it was painful and prolonged: but, like birth, it produced a new person, related to but by no means merely a continuance of its parents. That child would begin to reach its maturity in the middle and late seventies, during another turbulent new age. — Gardner Dozois, 1982 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Page 14 Winter/Spring 1983 interview with THOMAS DISC H by darrell sctweifzer There is no simple way to sum up the work of Thomas Disch. Easy labels fail. “Elegant,” “incisive,” “intense,” and others come to mind, but there is too much range to be encom¬ passed. Disch’s short stories range from the horrific “The Roaches” to. the surreal “Descending” to the farcical “Feathers from the Wings of An Angel” to the charming “The Brave Little Toaster.” He has written several superior science fiction novels, most notably 334, On Wings of Song, and Camp Concentration, a mystery-suspense novel, Black Alice (with John Sladek), and, as “Leonie Hargrave,” Clara Reeve. An ex¬ cerpt from a new, quite different novel (described toward the end of this interview) was recently published in AMERICAN POETRY REVIEW. Disch’s short work has appeared in FAN¬ TASY & SCIENCE FICTION, NEW WORLDS, OMNI, PENT¬ HOUSE, ANTAEUS, SHENEANDOAH, the PARIS REVIEW, and PLAYBOY. His best story collections are Getting Into Death and Fun With Your New Head. He has published much poetry, some of which is collected in The Right Way To Figure Plumb¬ ing (and more are on the way). He also paints. Thrust: You had an essay in Peter Nichols’ Science Fiction At Large entitled “The Embarrassments of Science Fic¬ tion,” which leads one to wonder whether you’ve been embarrassed by science fiction all along, or only got that way after prolonged exposure. Disch: No. That essay was written for a situation where there were going to be twelve people giving talks. There would have been an awful lot of promotional hype for science fiction in the course of those talks. I thought that one way to be interesting would be to offer some¬ thing besides promotional hype. So, it’s not a blanket Judgment of science fiction. There are, however, a number of writers in the field whom I, as an adult writer and reader, can’t read with pleasure or with serious respect, and since I have to live with the label of science fiction, and since so many other people judge science fiction by those writers, many of whom are very popular, it allowed me to exercise some of my long stored up discomforts. Thrust: There was one statement in there which probably raised a lot of eyebrows — basically that science fiction is read by adolescents and people who buy books in truck stops. Disch: I did try to characterize the audience that I felt was gobbling up the more embarrassing science fiction. There was a two-part argument. In the first part I said that a lot of science fiction is written for a juvenile audience verging on young adults. I think that’s so. Star Wars, which absolutely captured that audience and was an enormous success, did so because it success¬ fully targeted the age group for which that kind of science fiction has always been written. There’s the old saying that the Golden Age of science fiction is eleven. For me it certainly was. That was the age at which I dis¬ covered it with great delight, and read it almost ex¬ clusively for a couple of years. I think a lot of people approach science fiction that way. The problem is, when you’re forty, do you read the same works with the same pleasure? Will it afford you the same satisfac¬ tion? I don’t like the same food that I liked at age eleven or twelve. Now, for the few who can have it both ways, it is perfectly possible to write a book that is totally satis¬ fying to a bright twelve-year-old and a sophisticated forty-year-old. Some of the classics of world literature are in that category, say Gulliver’s Travels or Lewis Carroll. Few people can bring that off, and I don’t know if many writers would want to bring it off all of the time. I myself have just published a story that I wrote as a children’s book, called “The Brave Little Toaster.” That was seriously intended as a children’s book. F&SF published it. It was well received, but it’s meant to be the kind of children’s book that a grownup can read with equal pleasure. It’s probably not the same reading experience for the grownup. His attention is probably directed at different aspects of the story than the eleven-year-old’s, and I don’t think that even to be good you have to have it both ways, to write to both a mature and a young audience. I think that you can write stories for a young audience that are very successful but that a grownup wouldn’t be that interested in. I just recently reviewed The Stories of Ray Bradbury. I find it very diffi¬ cult to enjoy Bradbury now, but I know that I did back then. I know that kids still do. I think he’s a writer that only children can read, because a grownup taste is going to find just too much to object to, in the way that Bradbury writes, and in the limitations of his world view. Thrust: In that he’s drawn so much from his childhood that there’s nothing there for the adults? Disch: There are two things that offend me in his work, as an adult, that certainly didn’t bother me as a child. One, there’s a kind of hectoring tone, that we all have to sub¬ mit to his sense of what’s. . .warm and cozy? Those aren’t the words. Thrust: It seems icky sw%et? Disch: Yeah. It’s like Sugar Frosted Flakes. His idea of what an adequate emotional response is to certain high-power situations is often one that I cannot agree or sympa¬ thize with. He tries to forestall that kind of criticism in his introduction to the book. He mixes metaphors about the circus, and how he was always up at 5 A.M. to Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Page 15 get to the circus; that people outgrow this love of what children really understand that’s so vital, and that he’s never lost this quality of being open to these experi¬ ences. Well, I dare say I can still enjoy the circus my¬ self, but I have different thoughts when I go to the circus than Ray Bradbury seems to, and I prefer my own. The other element that I just can’t tolerate in Bradbury, and it’s part and parcel of his attitude, is just the way he writes. To me it is. . .balderdash? Thrust: Precious? Disch: Oh no, not precious. There are precious writers that I can enjoy, say, Walter Pater. It's false preciosity. It’s fake gold. It's false rhetoric. Ordinarily I wouldn’t go on about Bradbury because I feel that the people who enjoy him should be allowed to. I don’t want to take his books and burn them in the great book bonfire, or take them out of libraries, or even out of schoolrooms, be¬ cause they probably work very well in schoolrooms. But he makes greater claims for himself than that, and after a certain point I’m not prepared to recognize him as the doyen of science fiction, as Our Great Science Fiction Writer, or even one of the ten great science fic¬ tion writers. To the degree that the media seem to want to celebrate him as Mister Science Fiction, it seems to me that all science fiction suffers by being represented by such a jerk. Thrust: Is this a case of critical acclaim going to his head? Disch: I don’t think that is ever relevant in judging a writer’s work. A lot of good writers seem to have a pretty giddy over-estimation of themselves, and that’s okay, in as far as one is just a reader. If one is a friend of somebody like that, it can get to be a bit of a trial. Large egos don’t make for a lot of fun socially, but they don’t necessarily stop a writer from writing well, so long as some kind of an aesthetic is in control of them when they’re writing. For instance, Bradbury writes less now — many writers do that as they grow older, and the reasons are some¬ times interesting and worth talking about — but I don't think he ever got particularly worse. He never got better either. His late short stories in that collection seemed to show absolutely no development. He’s a profes¬ sional eleven-year-old and I suppose that the older you get, the harder it is to preserve that — let’s not say false naivete, because it may be a perfectly sincere naivete, artistically. A lot of science fiction writers seem to be locked into the necessity of writing for an audience that they condescend to. A lot of writers speak cynically of the necessity of entertaining readers, as if that prohibited them from being serious in their con¬ cerns. You know the argument: readers only like adven¬ tures, and they like to be entertained, and to forget. I think that when a writer begins to talk about the neces¬ sity of pleasing the audience, when he defines the audience as having different tastes than he himself has, that writer is going to find himself soon having a good case of writer’s block. Thrust: Most of the reader polls that I’ve seen, including some going back thirty years, suggest that the average sf / fantasy reader is about college age or slightly older. He is going to a middle-class college or has recently got¬ ten out of one. It seems to me that if such readers read so-called juveniles, this says more about society than it does about a specific audience. Could it be that our definitions of juvenile writing need to be reworked? Disch: Yes. I didn't mean to say that I don’t think that anybody but children reads these books, or can read them with enjoyment, or that the cutoff age would be something like eleven or twelve. From the perspective of being forty, twenty is pretty young. I don’t enjoy many of the books that I enjoyed when I was twenty, quite outside of science fiction. There are certain writers who are proverbially only approachable when you’re young, like Thomas Wolfe. If you miss Look Homeward Angel by the age of twenty-five, it just probably isn't going to be possible to read it with the same full acceptance that you can give when you’re young. That’s not to dismiss such writers. Everybody is once twenty, and wants to read books that are addressed to the condition of being twenty. What I wrote when I started off writing, in my early twenties, was certainly different in emotional tone, and probably in the amount of material that I was trying to compress into a given space. My range of reference was simply smaller then. I find that the kind of book that I like to read now is very different from the kind of book I read then, and it doesn’t even mean that the books are intellectually more demanding now. Take something quite at the other end of the spectrum from what we’ve been talking about, say, Thomas Pynchon. I don’t take much pleasure in reading Thomas Pynchon. If Pynchon had come along when I was in my twenties, I’m certain he would have been one of my favorite writers. So it’s not a question of highbrow and low¬ brow. It's a question that at certain stages in life, one approaches art for different kinds of pleasure. Thrust: Can you still read your own work with pleasure? Disch: There are two answers to that. If I’m reading it in an at¬ tempt to recapture a sense of who I was, like looking at old photographs in a family album — that kind of pleasure is available probably almost in proportion to the story’s age. I don’t recognize the person who wrote that story as being continuous with the self I am now. But I wouldn’t try to read myself for the kind of pleasure I would seek in another writer, because I always know what my story is going to be about. The only surprises that are in store for me are whether I wrote that stretch of a story with flair or not. Sometimes I don’t like my older prose. It will seem flat or forced or any number of things that I could object to in it. But it’s pretty impos¬ sible to read oneself for pleasure in the sense that one reads anything else for pleasure. Thrust: When you first began writing, did you begin with science fiction, or turn to science fiction because it is easier to break in there? Disch: Both, really. I was writing for a couple years in college, producing stories steadily, aware that they weren't marketable yet, knowing that I hadn’t reached takeoff point. There came a point when I thought, hmm, I can do it. I felt that I could bring it together, and I stayed home all of one weekend and wrote. I told myself that I would not leave the house until I had written this story, and I wrote it, and it was “The Double-Timer," and I sold it to FANTASTIC. So somehow I knew that I’d reached takeoff point. I chose to write science fiction because I knew that market would be easier to break into, but I had been writing science fiction among the other things that I was writing before that point, and I had al¬ ways intended to write some science fiction, although I hadn’t said, “I’m going to be a science fiction writer.” I didn’t set that as a major goal, but as soon as I began to start selling some science fiction stories, it seemed a goal that was within my reach, and so I reached for it. Thrust: A lot of writers have complained that the science fic¬ tion field of the early 1960's was very moribund and restrictive. Did you find this to be so? Disch: Not really. My stories were accepted pretty well at the rate at which I wrote them, and in very short order the early 60’s became the middle 60’s, and one was encour¬ aged to bite off altogether as much as one could chew. There would have been some editors at that time, as there are now, who would turn down what I would think to be a first-rate story for what I would think to be second-rate reasons, but I don't know that that was more the case then than it is now. Thrust: How long before you were aware that there was al¬ legedly such a thing as a New Wave and you were a part of it? Disch: I don’t think that even at the time I was part of it. I was part of a social group. A lot of those people were my Page 16 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 friends, but what was called the New Wave brought a lot of radically different writers together. Ballard never had anything in common with anyone else, except his few imitators. He was older than most of the rest of us, and he was certainly central to the effort to hype the idea that there was a New Wave. In retrospect the New Wave just seems to have been a period when a lot of individual writers were approaching their writing maturity at about the same time. Some of them fell by the wayside and didn’t go on to write very much, and others developed their own individual talent. We cer¬ tainly don’t look like a group, now that one can look over fifteen years of work that each of us have done. I don’t think that there was a whole lot of cross-fertiliza¬ tion. Who would it have been among my contempo¬ raries or New Wave people, who would appear to have been an influence on me, or me on them? I’ve read very little work that ever made me think, “Aha, somebody’s been reading me.” Thrust: How central was Michael Moorcock’s editorial in¬ fluence to all this? Disch: I was living in London, and he had a magazine there, and when I couldn’t sell stories to money markets, I was pretty certain that if it was a good story, it could appear in NEW WORLDS. I tried to place them first in markets where I would earn more money. I certainly wasn’t writing for NEW WORLDS. A good many of the stories that appeared in those first issues of NEW WORLDS in its new format were already written by the time I was on the scene in England. Mike was buying up a fair amount of my backlog that I hadn’t been able to place elsewhere, some very good stories among them, and Camp Concentration was already contracted and outlined before I reached England. Whether I felt some greater degree of audacity in writing it because NEW WORLDS was there is a possibility. The better part of that book was written in isolation, in Austria, and I think that much of its audacity, such as it is, probably was generated by the act of writing itself. That’s how novels work. If you start a book and a voice begins to appear, and it’s an exciting book, that’s probably the chief force of inspiration. It’s generated by the book itself, as the book is in progress. I think most people feel that way when writing a book. Thrust: A lot of reviewers felt that there were problems with the ending of Camp Concentration, essentially that you’d written yourself into a corner and had to work a lot of sudden reversals — somebody having been in somebody else’s body for half the book without our knowing it — in order to bring it to a conclusion. Was this the case? Disch: It certainly wasn’t a case of writing myself into a cor¬ ner, because the plot was outlined in almost exactly the shape it appears in the book. I tend to plot out a book pretty thoroughly in my head before I begin it, less so now than then. But the preparations for the reversals at the ending are laid very carefully through the story. For me it's a point of pride that when I’m preparing a surprise in a story, it should come upon the reader as a surprise. If it does so, I wouldn’t think that I’d failed. It’s another matter whether or not people find the ending emotionally satisfying. I think that after The Genocides a lot of people were convinced that I had to write as dismal an ending as the human heart could bear, and that wasn’t the point that I was trying to make in Camp Concentration. To me the ending is a fairly black one, but it allows the reader to suppose that the protagonist might go on living for a while yet. The pro¬ blem of writing a satisfactory end to a novel is an in¬ teresting one because it has to be both inevitable and in some way unpredictable. If it’s completely off the wall it's unsatisfying, and if you’ve foreseen the ending coming all the way through, it’s also unsatisfying. The reader has to feel both that he’s driven toward something inevitable, and at the same time he can’t be able to second guess the author entirely. The ending of On Wings of Song, for example— a lot of people have said that they feel that it was distressing or uncalled for or not the ending they wanted. If a reader forms his own idea of what the ending of the book has to be, and it’s not that ending, that may be a fault of the book, but it may equally be a fault of the reader who’s not paying attention to the book he's reading but only using the book as a vehicle for his own wish-fulfillments. Most pulp adventure novels are written as vehicles for wish- fulfillment, so you have to have a kind of stereotyped happy ending. Then there are readers who assume they are more sophisticated than that and, just as categorically, won’t accept any sort of happy ending if the book is serious and has dark elements. I think both views are wrong. Thrust: In the 1960’s, some of the more vociferous opponents of their own ideas of what the New Wave was were con¬ demning your books for being evil and cynical and black and wicked and all that. . . Disch: To talk cases, The Genocides was a novel in which the aliens win. That was the first time anybody thought to do that. I don’t know if it’s been done since. It seemed to me a perfectly reasonable thing to do; not that I was prophesying the end of humanity, or saying that humanity doesn’t have the spunk to beat the damn aliens, but rather that tragedy supposes that the pro¬ tagonist will be defeated. If you take tragedy on as an aesthetic form, a happy ending can be very unsatisfy¬ ing. I don’t suppose that Shakespeare can be really said to have a down, bleak, nihilistic, pessimistic view of life because he wrote a few tragedies. Some of these tragedies are very convincing as expressions of a very dark view of life. To equate any particular work with a writer’s ultimate affirmation or negation of life is plain silly. All tragedies would fall under the same onus. As for cynical, that’s a question of one’s sense of humor. One man’s cynicism is another man’s good joke. I can think of a case in point today. I was looking at SCIENCE FICTION REVIEW, and there was an article by Orson Scott Card, who said that if he thought the world were really as I had protrayed it in a story called “Concepts," he would kill himself. Well, Orson, the world is really like that, but you don't have to keep that promise. In a later issue he took exception to “Josie and the Elevator, ”a story of mine that I thought was just a sweetheart of a tale, I couldn’t imagine anybody in the world who would be challenged by it, but he has this idea that I’m a cynical and if I wrote a cookbook, he would find it to be a dark vision. I always thought that the day would come when I would have my own back against Orson Scott Card. On the contrary, the first story I’ve had to read of his — I don’t seek him out — was in this year's Year’s Best Science Fiction: “Unac¬ companied Sonata” which seemed to me to be on my wavelength entirely. Everything that he could have said against “Josie and the Elevator,” a cynical, dark fable, etc., would seem to apply just as well to that story. It seems curious that somebody who on his own aesthetic grounds would seem to me to be doing much the same thing and expressing many of the same mean¬ ings should be so sensitive to what he thinks of as my ‘darkness.’ I think that I’ve become for him what Jung calls the Shadow. Thrust: I wonder what he would make of "Feathers from the Wings of an Angel.” Disch: Yes, that’s the one that would be most likely to horrify him by its deliberate cynicism. It’s a send-up of turn-of- the-century sentimental tales, of the Gene Stratton Porter variety. I think it's a very good send-up, and if you can’t laugh at that kind of thing and make fun of the kind of optimism that is just one step away from idiocy, then we all have to be Born-Again Christians and stop Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 17 writing altogether. Thrust: One is reminded of the quote attributed to Oscar Wilde. Disch: Yes, that if you can read of the death of Little Nell without laughing you must have a heart of stone. Thrust: How much of the author’s attitude can you discern from a story? Disch: Well you can get a good view of his intelligence, and I think that is what I mostly look for. Not intelligence in terms of I.Q., but wisdom, you might say. It’s not just what one says. It’s the fact that you've managed to at¬ tach a particular conversational tone of voice to it. Ond does judge people by their conversation and the tone of voice with which they deliver what they’re saying. That’s why interviews are so treacherous, because very often you say something and give a particular inflec¬ tion to what you’re saying, and the inflection disap¬ pears when it’s a cold typescript. That’s why it’s so much harder to write than to talk, because when you’re writing you’re getting those inflections in. When I’m reading George Eliot, what I relish is a particular tone of voice in the prose that tells me that I am listening to, or in conversation with, a person who really understands the world and the way that it works, and who is able to give a very concise and intelligent ac¬ count of it. It’s that feeling that you’re listening to, or in the room with, somebody who knows where it’s at. That applies to the tone whether one is writing tragedy or comedy. Bradley, in his book on Shakespearian tragedy, makes the distinction right off that you cannot suppose that the tragic view put forth by a play like King Lear is exactly the same as Shakespeare's view of life, because if you were to write that into a developed philosophy, it would be a very different philosophy and no more or less intelligent that the one that goes into Henry IV, with Prince Hal and Falstaff and that set of problems, or again the philosophy informing Twelfth Night. Any one of those could be extrapolated into a philosophical system with very different conclusions. They’re out of the same mind. I think everybody is capable of, as it were, looking at the world through dif¬ ferent matrices. They don’t cancel each other out, nor do they necessarily add up together. I don’t think you can collate all of Shakespeare’s plays and come up with one Shakespearian world view. I don’t think I could collate everything I’ve ever written and arrive at a coherent philosophy. But that doesn’t bother me because I don’t read much philosophy. I find it boring. For me fiction has always been the best way to talk about most things. Thrust: Do you find this kind of intelligence in science fiction very often? Disch: Oh yes. There are hundreds of writers who have written at their best moments stories that bear any amount of intelligent appreciation. I think there are very few writers who do it consistently in one story or novel after another, especially in a field where there is so much economic incentive to write too much too fast. The tradition of pulp writing is one that has been ruinous for some writers in the field. There are good artists who have simply trapped themselves in endless series when they should have written one good novel using the material. But the economics of the situation dictate otherwise. I haven’t read Jack Chalker’s long series, but I’ve just read a review of it by someone whose opi¬ nion I usually trust. He said what a pity it was that the last book in that series was the fifth book of the series. Donaldson is already writing a second trilogy from the same material that provided one trilogy already. If that isn’t an unhappy commentary on the way that the market forces writers to do its will, I don’t know what is. So I think that that side of science fiction marketting is an unfortunate one for writers who need to earn a living and don’t always have the will or the wit to resist the quick advantage. Thrust: How have you coped? I haven’t noticed you writing a long series of diluted novels. Disch: Well, maybe I haven’t. I certainly have set it as a goal not to fall into that trap. At the same time I am a profes¬ sional writer and that means that I have to keep busy writing at my own good pace, and I have to find material sufficient to keep me going. One way I’ve solved that is by writing more than just science fiction. I’ve written a couple of historical novels. I do a fair amount of non¬ fiction. Some poetry. I just try and write as many dif¬ ferent things as I can. It’s more fun for me. I feel more zest as a writer by stretching myself in some new direc¬ tion. Not necessarily a harder book because each book has its own particular set of difficulties, but a book that requires a different set of skills than the last one, a different kind of knowledge or expertise, or simply research. That would be one way to do it. The other is simply to get a job. I think it would be a happier thing for a writer to be writing a few good books than to be writing fifteen, twenty, a score or more of books that repeat themselves, that don’t each merit being read for its own sake. But then, I don’t know— it may not be a fair criticism of the people who do write that kind of book because they’re usually quite honest that they are turning out something, as it were, off the production line. So in a sense I can take a live-and-let-live attitude. I just don't read that kind of book with much pleasure, and I can’t imagine that they write it with much pleasure. Certainly one gets a feeling as one reads a book whether or not the writer’s heart is in it, and so often one reads the fourteenth retread of a once good ideam and one knows. There’s a tone behind it of Sisyphus pushing the rock up the hill. Thrust: Have you ever had editors trying to force you into that position? Disch: I’ve generally had happy relationships with editors. Usually an editor who likes my work would agree with most of what I’ve been saying. It’s the common wisdom of the marketplace. Thrust: Did you ever send anything to John W. Campbell, Jr.? Disch: Yes. He never took anything. I can’t remember if I ever even had large responses in letters, but the funniest thing of all is that at one point, when I was a client with the Meredith Agency— it was very early in my career— Campbell had had one of his ideas for a story he wanted written, and he told the agency the idea, and they passed it on to me and said Campbell would like a story on this idea. And I thought, well, why not? I’m a professional. And so I wrote exactly the story that he had outlined, and which he rejected for inscrutable reasons, except that perhaps he had more integrity in that case than I did, because something in his soul told him that I was not a writer that he had any business en¬ couraging. There are fundamental differences in our political points of view, if nothing else, but I think it goes deeper than that. So he turned down the story. If you’d seen his proposal and what I wrote, you’d have seen that it was, well, a professional piece of hackwork. The story is called “Doubting Thomas” and it came out in F&SF. Thrust: Are you doing any more science fiction in the near future? Disch: Well, I’m doing a novel right now called The Business Man, A Tale of Terror, that is a fantasy, but a fantasy written with science fictional intelligence, which is to say it tries to use a developed rationale for the super¬ natural events, and although it’s a supernatural ra¬ tionale, the novel isn’t a trad...onal ghost story. I think it’s a ghost story such as has never been written before, but at the beginning of any work one has to have that kind of high estimate of what one is doing as a way of getting off the ground. — September, 1980 Page 18 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 IrOM-PCIURED URN CHARLES SHEFHELD In this issue I propose to review Carl Sagan’s first novel, Contact. I don’t find it easy to write reviews, and generally speaking I am wary about doing it at all. I don’t much need the money, and as Charles Dickens said, I would rather have friends. Writing a review of Contact was particularly difficult; prin¬ cipally, I suppose, because the book does not exist at the time this column is being written. Not at all, not even as a first draft manuscript. I am told that outlines have been submitted to Simon and Schuster, but I have not seen them. Nonetheless, I feel a review is needed, and if any field can accept the idea of the prescient review it should be sf. Why is the review needed? Clearly, to make a point con¬ cerning the writing of science fiction, since that’s what this magazine is all about. But first permit me a small digression. Anyone reading this article who is neither blind nor deaf knows that the largest advance in sf history was offered last year to Carl Sagan. He was to write and sf novel with the title Contact, the theme would be (surprise!) the first contact with an extraterrestrial intelligence, and the advance was set at $2,000,000. The book will be part of a complete multimedia package, with movie, toys, T-shirts, and all the rest of it. As a result the deal went through the President of Simon and Schuster, with the sf editors not consulted before the signing. Yes, they became involved after the fact, but not in any way that could influence the terms of the contract. And why should they be? I can hear now the discussion that went on in the Board Room of Simon and Schuster. This is not a contract with an author of sf. This is a contract with Carl Sagan, who commands a very different and far larger audience than any sf writer in history. We’re talking about a guy whose last book sold well over a million in hard cover. So what if he has not previously published science fiction, or indeed fiction of any kind? Most of my friends were outraged, particularly by that last fact. The reactions that I heard from them when the news came out were complex and mixed with swear words, but I recogniz¬ ed the following components: “Jesus Christ! Two million dollars!" “Why give a contract like that to somebody who never wrote fiction? He’ll produce something that stinks, and some poor editor will be told to take the dumb manuscript and turn it into a best-seller.” “Who cares if he can’t write a good novel? He just needs to hang on to that advance for a while. Hell, if he doesn’t write a word he’s got it made. With today’s rates he'll come out at least three hundred thousand ahead every year, just on the in¬ terest.” “Two million dollars. My God, that has to be about twenty dollars a word. Talk about a temptation to pad your manuscript!” “I wonder if he’s interested in somebody ghosting it? I’ve got three novels of first encounter sitting in my desk. He could get me really cheap — say for ten percent?” "Two million dollars. Let’s see now, to earn that much with my present market rates I’ll have to write forty million words. And at my rate of production, that’s going to take me— how long? I suppose six hundred years — assuming I don’t block. Jesus, how much is forty million words. Has anyone ever written that much?” (To set your mind at rest on the details, someone has writ¬ ten that much, and more. Charles Hamilton, better known by his chief pseudonym, Frank Richards, wrote at least eighty million words of fiction in his 85-year lifetime— maybe as much as a hundred million words. Three generations of English school children were raised on Billy Bunter, Greyfriars' School, and Richards’ other creations. I'm very fond of one anecdote about Frank Richards. Someone once accused him of habitual¬ ly representing foreigners in his works as though they were funny. He replied in a puzzled way that foreigners were funny. Also, I’d guess Isaac Asimov’s total lifetime output to date, fic¬ tion and non-fiction, at close to twenty million words. But he’s only in his early sixties and still hammering it out faster than ever.) Back to business. My own reactions probably had bits of all of the above, but there was something else— an undercur¬ rent of thoughts that would come, I suspect, only to somebody who had spent many years writing scientific papers without ever trying to produce a line of fiction. In January, Sagan remarked that he kept waking up at three in the morning and thinking about the novel. He has my full sympathies. He faces what I term the conversion problem. Namely:“l’ve got all these ideas in my head. How do I make them into stories ?" That’s where Sagan is now, and I know the position well. I was there five and a half years ago but I did not, thank God, have to deliver my first fiction on a big book that will be scrutinized and reviewed by half the world. The subject is one that seems to have been competely Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Page 19 overlooked. Articles concerning the science in science fiction are not uncommon. I wrote one a couple of years ago for EMPIRE SF, and I read one recently by Greg Benford. But those articles invariably concern the way in which scientific theories and scientific thinking are used in sf. I have never seen an arti¬ cle which addresses the question of the effects of scientific writing style on the production of readable sf. But that becomes a factor whenever a practicing scientist takes up the pen for the first time and tries to produce fiction. So I want to look now at some of the requirements for science writing, and see how they fit into the needs of good fiction writing. Clarity: In writing of science, this is paramount. If you need to use the same word ten times in five sentences to get your meaning across with minimum ambiguity, you do it. Sure, it’s nice to write elegantly and concisely, too, but that is much less important than the need to get the ideas across precisely. But in fiction, it is important to leave room for the reader’s imagina¬ tion. Explain everything, and you produce a dull story. And use the same words ten times in a paragraph, and you’ll be judged an illiterate. Style: For the past half century, there has been a movement to make science articles more and more formal and impersonal. The pendulum has at last perhaps begun to swing the other way, but for a long time there seemed to be a feeling that any trace of liveliness in the writing of a scientific article detracted from its professional credibility. It has been a long time since I read anything like Lord Rayleigh and William Ramsay’s descriptions of their experiments isolating argon, in which they remarked that at one point the chemicals they were work¬ ing with smelled like a dead rat. Sagan, luckily for him, has much experience in the infor¬ mal writing style. That wins him many general readers but generates suspicion in the minds of some of his professional colleagues. If a scientist is to write acceptable fiction, he or she must cultivate that informal style— and then learn that a variety of styles are needed to write well. Spontaneity: Many sf writers are natural performers, fully at home on the stage. Haldeman, Azimov, Ellison, and Dozois, to name just four out of many, have the speed of response to be genuinely funny and entertaining under almost any cir¬ cumstances. And they will offer themselves for auction, wear funny clothes, or sing, or dance, in a very lively and likeable way without a trace of self-consciousness. This animation and energy carries through into their written works. Scientists, putting it mildly, are not trained towards stage performance, nor towards rapid and witty responses. Any who display such talents do so in spite of their academic ex¬ periences. For fifteen years, I was rarely called on to make spontaneous comments on anything. I find that although I can now usually say something when I am on an sf panel and a response is called for, what I really wanted to say occurs to me five or ten minutes later. I am strong on esprit de I’escalier, and have much sympathy with Addison, who wrote superbly but felt that he lacked conversation: “I have but ninepence in ready money, but I can draw for a thousand pounds." Again, this is not an area where Carl Sagan will have pro¬ blems. He has abundant spontaneity and showmanship. (At the opposite extreme we have Professor Wickramasinghe, who testified at the recent Arkansas creationist trial. The judge noticed that the Professor was reading his answers to cross- examination from file cards. When he was told that this was not permitted, Wickramasinghe replied with dignity, "I never lecture without my notes.”) Pacing: Believe it or not, there is pacing in good scientific papers. There can also be mystery, beauty, elegance, profundi¬ ty, and excitement, though the words have rather different uses than they would for a work of fiction. I believe that the best scientific papers are much closer to poetry than they are to prose fiction. There is the same feeling of balance, of com¬ pression, of subtlety, and of deeper levels of implication. Sagan writes science with pace, wit, discernment, and erudi¬ tion. But it is not easy to transfer those virtues to fiction, and he is unlikely to succeed on his first attempt. Emotion: We have to distinguish the emotion of scientists the emotion of scientific writing. Science is supposed to be totally objective (it’s not, of course) so that all subjective elements such as emotion should be removed from written works. Scietific papers are often polished so that any trace of informality or trial-and-error in the original investigation has gone from the final product. The result appears as an exercise in pure reason, with no sign of the blood, sweat and tears that went into the creation. If you apply that process to writing fic¬ tion (and the scientist who begins to write fiction after many years of scientific papers will tend to leave out the b, s, and t automatically) the result may be intellectually stimulating but it will be pretty arid emotionally. Scientists themselves are no different from any other human beings when it comes to such things as territorial rights or priority of authorship. A really good scientific duel is not terminated by the death of one of principals. In fact, it is not necessarily finished even by the death of all the original participants. Consider Newton, Leibniz, and the invention of the calculus. That argument has been going on for three hun¬ dred years, and a look at FUSION magazine will show you that it is still going on today. Scientists who turn to fiction must un-learn many years of training before they can bring themselves to weep and bleed in public. Background: I think that scientists are in good shape here. The habit of visualizing fully, then describing the result clearly and economically, is one that a scientist has been trained to develop. If you take a look at the first fiction written by practis¬ ing scientists, a clear description of ideas, objects, and physical events is often the principal virtue. Sagan’s work will probably be no exception. Dialog: this will be tough on the scientist-turned-sf writer. You simply have to hope that there is a good ear at work. Certainly nothing in science calls for a talent for dialog. It’s not easy, and nothing substitutes for experience. Bob Forward's work provides an excellent recent example of what I'm talking about. His first novel, Dragon’s Egg, had real problems with dialog, even after it was worked over at Del Rey. But he’s a quick study. His second book, Ride the Magic Dragonfly, is a huge step forward in the areas of dialog and characters, and there is still the deluge of interesting scientific ideas that carried the reader through Dragon’s Egg. If my judg¬ ment is anything to go by, his new book will be a highly praised best-seller. In addition to Bob Forward, other suggested studies for early dialog problems in late-in-life fiction-writers would be Fred Hoyle, Leo Szilard, and Bertrand Russell who took late-in- life to extremes— (Satan in the Suburbs was published when he was eighty-one!). If you ask why Benford, Tiptree, or Schenk did not have this problem, I can only suggest that it is because they wrote fiction for a long time before they became widely- known writers. The practice had been done, but it was hidden from the public eye. [Editor's Note: Really Charles, could we get on with this? Most of the readers have probably forgotten that this is sup¬ posed to be a review of Sagan's new book!-DF] Huh? What are you doing in my column? Anyway, moving right along. . . Character: Again, nothing in science gives useful writing ex¬ perience. I think that this is the biggest hurdle the scientist- writer must cross. The problem is, even when you think motives and reactions for a character, there is a reluctance to put them down on paper if they are extreme, crude, or emo¬ tional. You feel as though you will be appearing naked in public. It takes a long time to realize that we are all naked in public. Even though most of us have developed a fairly good overall image that we try to project to the world, we betray ourselves all the time in the minor things. I know people who project generosity but cannot resist miserliness (which they somehow assume will go unnoticed) in small things. Or others who are sweet and reasonable colleagues, but tyrants to spouse and children. It takes deliberate effort to recognize that a story will not necessarily be regarded as a window to the author's warped Page 20 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 psych, and that in any case we all betray ourselves through our actions tar more than we will ever do through the printed page. I think that every writer must go through that process of self- examination, and the older you are when you start to write fic¬ tion, the harder it is. The only way I could get THRUST to let me talk about the problems of the scientist who turns to writing science fiction was to promise this lousy review, but now I suppose I’m stuck with it. How accurate do I believe it will be? I expect my review to be wrong in details (I’ll be amazed if Contact says anything about the Gossameres) but spot on in its general comments and criticisms. And if the editors are permitted a really free hand and asked to do a lot of work on the manuscript, the dialog may be much better in the final book than I fear it will be in the first draft. I would love to be wrong, and find that Sagan has written the best of sf book of the decade. But Ifeopards don’t change spots, old dogs don't learn new tricks, and a thousand other familiar sayings attest to the fact that we all, like it or not, are the creations of our own experience. Anyone, sage or fool, must be conditioned by his thoughts and actions of the past. To expect that Carl Sagan would somehow be an exception to this, that he could somehow— [Honestly, Charles, I'm not sure if anyone's still reading this. . . Why not just do the review now? — DF] Right. Here goes. If the reader is sceptical that a prescient review can be accurate, save this issue and read it again when (or if) the novel appears. REVIEW: CONTACT by Carl Sagan Reviewing this book presents certain unique problems. The signing of the contract was announced in a storm of publicity, and the size of the advance brought feelings of rage, envy, and despair to the sensitive bosoms of most established science fiction writers. More than that, the book is written by a creative scientist who is now recognized nationally and inter¬ nationally as the world’s foremost popularizer of science. To find someone of equal fame in the field, we have to go back to Bertrand Russell or Henri Poincare. And even those giants, lacking television exposure, never achieved the instant recognition that Sagan enjoys today. Add the fact that the novelist in question has never before published a fictional work of any length, and you have a special situation. This is not just a book, it’s an event. The reviewer opens to Page One with a whole set of preconceptions, wishes, and fears, but with no track record of earlier fiction by the author to help his thinking. For once the book must stand or fall on its own. The announced theme of the novel does not make things any easier. First contact with an extraterrestrial civilization: Sagan is risking comparison with a thousand other works, from Leinster's “First Contact” to Clarke’s “Rendezvous With Rama”, from Benford’s “In The Ocean Of Night” to Spielberg’s “Close Encounters Of The Third Kind”. That last comparison may be a good one, since “Contact” is to be part of a multimedia package including book, movie, toys, and Heaven knows what else. So much for the apologia; how about the book itself? Let us begin with a negative comment. Sagan has clearly read a great deal of science fiction — a long time ago. The book, in style and content, draws from the sf field as it was in the early and middle fifties. The New Wave is still far from the shores of Contact. Well, so what? I’m not in love with style for style’s sake. If the plot is new, an old-fashioned style is quite acceptable. But there’s the rub, folks; it isn’t. Against this, set a positive comment. Sagan has also clearly read a great deal of science, kept current, and has put it to good use. The same mind that in earlier works could see a carbon world as a giant diamond, conceive of Venus as a runaway greenhouse, or imagine Halley’s Comet as a moun¬ tainous snowball hurtling towards the Sun, is still at work here. Those vivid mental pictures are the best part of the book, grab¬ bing the reader's mind again and again. There is no doubt that Sagan has learned very well how to take a concept that is scientifically complex and convert it to a series of simple and arresting images, in a way that few others can match (Robert Jastrow, Fred Hoyle, Stephen Gould, and the late Loren Eiseley are in my opinion the modern competition as combinations of scientific reputation and imaginative power.) Couple this with a wholly persuasive account of the way in which the alien’s presence is first detected, and we seem to be off to a very good start. It should not surprise us that Sagan is convincing here; the methods are no more than a translation to a space environment of the techniques that he, Frank Drake, and others of the CETI team pioneered here on Earth. Similarly, in communications with the aliens, and in discussion of their mental processes and physical structure, Sagan has again drawn on his own earlier works, everything from speculations on the evolution of our intelligence contained in The Dragon’s Egg (an inspired title) to the plaques and discs carried on the Pioneer and Voyager spacecrafts. This is all fascinating and fitting, and if we find it also a lit¬ tle familiar, this will not be true to the millions of readers and viewers who are being exposed to these concepts for the first time. Let’s face it, this book is reaching out for an audience far larger than the sf readership, for a group of people as big as the readers of Dune and The Lord Of The Rings combined. Perhaps, then, it is churlish to dwell on the novel’s main weaknesses. Or, perhaps, since this will be to many millions the complete embodiment of science fiction, all of the field that they are ever likely to read, we ought to wring our hands more than usual over the book’s failings. That’s the sad part. With the scientific idea-pool from which Sagan draws, the novel could have been something incredible. As it is. . . The problem, predictably, comes in two areas. Characters, and dialog. To a lesser extent there is also a problem of pacing, but some minor excisions and additions should help that before the book reaches final galleys. Even the most convincing character will not come alive if the words and thoughts that he/she/it utters sound like bad translations from Latvian. Unless, perhaps, the author has already made it clear that this is a Latvian, struggling to com¬ municate thoughts in a foreign tongue (English). This may be the reason that the aliens are both more credible as characters, and somehow more human, than the members of homo sa¬ piens who jerk their wooden way through the pages. No one minds if an alien sounds a little alien. The principal human character, a female who acts more like a man than a woman, and not much like either, reminded me of Florence Foster Jenkins— which is to say, I couldn’t rid my head of the thought that perhaps she was acting that way on purpose, but I couldn’t see why she would be. It is not, by the way, that Sagan does not feel his characters; there is plenty of evidence that he does. But his technique lets him down, so that again and again the intention dies in the execution. Then, just when the reader is at the point of outrage and ready to quit, we come across another mind-grabber. At one point it is the Gossameres, taking the Cheshire Cat concept past Lewis Carroll to an alien touch of pure logic; or it is Genevieve Spencer, summoned from fairyland to struggle through the dark ways between the stars with a conveyance that no other author has ever come close to imagining. A magic moment. But right after that we have a most horrible chapter, Barbara Cartland out of Hugo Gernsback. In summary, Sagan has concocted a Christmas pudding, with lots of heavy dough separating the plums and the pieces of silver. Like the curate’s egg, parts of it are excellent, and others stink. Will it sell? Of course it will. Pushed this hard anything will sell. And the book is not bad. If it had appeared as the first novel by an unknown writer, it would have been praised in the sf field as the work of a highly imaginative and promising newcomer. So on balance Contact is a disappointment. But not a disaster. And a first novel is just that, a beginning, not an end. . . cont. on page 38 Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Page 21 George Alec Effinger What I thought I’d do last fall was make a lot of money bet¬ ting on football games. It seemed to me to be a simple enough proposition. What made it difficult in reality, however, was something called the point spread. You see, it isn’t enough just to be able to predict which of two teams is going to win a foot¬ ball game. With a point spread, you give the weaker team a han¬ dicap which is supposed to equalize things. It’s as if Red China went to war with Gladys Knight and the Pips; it wouldn’t be tough to predict which side would win. But what if you spotted Gladys and the gang a few considerations (say, the Chinese aren’t allowed to use anything mechanical, electronic or sharp; must ask permission of Gladys before attacking; and have to be in bed by seven o’clock). Well, the smart money would still be on the Chinese. So the oddsmakers fiddle with the point spread some more, and eventually they arrive at a pretty good balance, and have given Gladys Knight and the Pips enough of a han¬ dicap so that the smart money begins to have some doubts. Doubt is the constant companion of the serious bettor. A beginner can get very excited about a “lock,” a game that’s a sure thing. For instance, Ohio state vs. Northwestern was a lock. There was no way that Northwestern could beat Ohio State in a rational universe. Northwestern finished the season with a losing streak of thirty-one games, and became a kind of national laughingstock. No bookie in his right mind would ac¬ cept a bet on Ohio State without spotting Northwestern a pile of points. The important question was, therefore: how big a pile? Well, it was about thirty-five. In a football game, that’s a lot of points. We’re saying that before the teams even leave their locker rooms, Northwestern has five touchdowns in the bank. Can Ohio State overcome that kind of handicap? That's what I asked myself. On one hand, I generally don’t like to spot anybody more than nine points, under any circumstances. On the other hand, Northwestern is a special case. I weighed all the factors, but I decided that thirty-five points was just too much to give. So I didn’t put any money on that game. As it turned out, Ohio state won that game by a margin of fifty or fifty five points. I should have had faith. About the time when the men of the scarlet and gray were driving to victory, there appeared in the world a new novel call¬ ed The Wolves of Memory. I wrote the book in February of 1981 and it was published in October, which in my personal ex¬ perience set a record for Shortest Time Lag Between Typewriter and Bookstore, in the category of Novel, Hardcover. r Editor’s Note: The Wolves of Memory has just been released in paperback by Berkley, — DF] And if you don’t think there was a lot of betting and bet-hedging involved with the birth of that book, then you fail to understand the complex play of forces which attend the appearance of every crummy sf yarn that hits the stands. (I’ve always liked that phrase: “hits the stands.” Sometimes I’ll go downtown to Gilmour’s, the big newstand on Royal Street, and wait until the distributor’s truck pulls up with the new books and magazines. The guy will heave these big old packages out of the van like they were sacks of dirty laundry. The books really do “hit the stands.” With a dull thud, a kind of critical opinion in its own right. I think of the weeks of labor and agonizing that went into the creation of each book, and I watch the cruel reception the books get. It always makes me smile; the writing game is no place for the faint of heart. After all, most of the time these aren’t my books. If they were my books, I’d be throwing up.) Anyway. The first bet was mine, when I decided to go with the story idea and turn it into three hundred some-odd type¬ written pages. There were other things I could have done dur¬ ing the early part of 1981, other than write that book. I could have eaten occasionally, for instance, or gotten a whole night’s sleep, or paused a moment to trample the flowers. But no; the Muse whispered in my ear (I think; I don’t hear out of my left one) and I started a new book. I didn’t know how it would turn out, so that was a big gamble. I was betting several weeks of my life. I was betting that my experience as a writer would over¬ come the handicap of not knowing very much about the way the novel would look when it was finished. That is the handicap that paralyzes many beginning writers— and some old hands, too. Occasionally, that big pile of blank white paper which must be turned into a novel is a ferocious enemy. The blank page probably owns more victories than Bear Bryant and Amos Alonzo Stagg put together. Against the fear engendered by the huge task involved with any kind of artistic creation, a slender outline and a few pages of notes seems like a puny defense. But there is an ancient sports maxim which has some relevance here, I think: On any given day, any team can beat any other team. Don’t examine that too closely, or the hope it offers will fizzle away like the bubbles in yesterday’s Coke. It says that no matter how feeble a team may appear to be, the statistics and charts used by the oddsmakers never take into account such things as luck or inspiration (which may be the same thing). Northwestern might have beaten Ohio State; there wasn’t a court injunction against the possibility. And my scraps of paper and scribbled ideas might overcome the dread¬ ful inertia of an unopened box of Gilbert 20 lb. bond typing paper. From my point of view, the beginning of the novel entails the greatest gamble. But it isn’t the only one, and the people who make subsequent bets may feel theirs exceed mine in risk. My editor, for example, undertook to publish the novel on the basis of a very skimpy description. She made a bet: having seen a considerable quantity of my writing in the past, she was betting that if she talked the publisher into giving me a contract and a chunk of money in advance, that I would in fact complete the novel, and that it would be of publishable quality. Her bet in¬ cluded laying on the line her professional reputation (and, therefore, to a certain extent, her job). No greater faith has anyone than she who goes to bat for a book sight unseen. So far, I and my editor have formed a kind of co-operative venture, a team. We both want my book to be as good as it can be, and as successful as possible. A good editor is one of the most im¬ portant resources a writer has. I’ve always thought that fandom Page 22 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 ought to do more to recognize the contributions of these editors; I think their names would be familiar only to a small percentage of readers and convention-goers. But the editors have a vital role— after all, it is they who decide which books will end up in the bookstores, and it is they who decide what you are going to read. I’ve been lucky over the years to have developed working relationships with some of the best editors in the sf field, and I owe quite a bit to their perception and judg¬ ment. Now, a single bet is safer than a multiple wager, but the payoff is smaller. Most people who put money on football games don’t have a bookie, not in the Hollywood sense. I don't know some balding pot-bellied Damon Runyon character with a stub of cigar in his mouth who operates a betting shop in the back of a candy store. The most common thing is the betting card. This lists each week’s games, both college and profes¬ sional. It tells you which is the home team, and gives you the number of points you must spot the underdog. Then you can circle either the favorite, which must beat the underdog by more than the stated number of points, or you can take the weaker team plus the points. In that case, the underdog doesn’t actually have to win; all it has to do is lose by fewer points than the handicap. • If you bet one unit (a buck or five or ten or two hundred fifty thousand) and your team wins, you receive: absolutely nothing. This is the clever part. The cards require that you pick at least three games. If winners and losers were determined randomly, your chances of winning would be Vi. Picking two winners would be Vi x Vi, or V*. The odds of picking three winners is therefore ’/.. The payoff for picking three winners is five units. So the, ah, organization supplying the cards is paying out five bucks for every eight it takes in. Football betting is a sucker’s pastime. But, like Diamond Jim Brady once said, "If you can afford it, it’s fun to be a sucker.” (We will not go into a discussion of whether or not I can afford it. Such a question is beyond the scope of the pre¬ sent column.) There are many systems which predict with accuracy bet¬ ter than coin-flipping which teams are likely to win. I’ve taken seven of them, eliminated their redundant elements, squashed them into one unwieldy formula, and have been able to pick winners about 75% of the time, That's not bad. But guess what trips me up: the point spread. I knew Penn State would beat Notre Dame; I had to give ND four points. Penn State won, but only by three. So I lost, even though the other two games I chose I predicted perfectly. When I decide to write a new book, and my editor decides to take it, the publisher must make his decision, his bet. Do you go strong with the book, or do you back another one and let mine ride with the also-rans in that season’s list? Do you put a double-page ad in Publisher’s Weekly (THIS FALL’S SUREFIRE BESTSELLER BY THE AUTHOR OF NOTHING MUCH IN THE PAST) or do you drop the book on the carpet like a piece of but¬ tered toast, hoping that nobody will notice? The big risk, the big gamble, is backing a book with a huge promotion. Sometimes a publisher wins, and when he does, he wins big. I recall being in the office when the publisher was deciding bet¬ ween The Exorcist and another, equally remarkable novel. You know which one they went with; if the nod had gone the other way, you would never have heard of The Exorcist. if the publisher loses (and this happens more often than not), all that remains are several thousand cardboard dumps in bookstores all over the country, an embarrassing series of ads in trade journals, a lot of unsold copies, and the bills for the whole campaign. Maybe a black mark will go against the names of the underlings responsible, but the publisher doesn’t suffer too much. Why? Because he’s hedged his bet, something I as an author can’t do. The publisher has released a number of other books at the same time, like spores from a triffid. The publisher spends very little promoting these other books. He knows how many copies he has to sell to make a little profit. The print run doesn’t exceed that number by very much, and the books are targeted at markets that will consume the available copies fairly quickly. All this is known from ex¬ perience and market research. So the books with little ex¬ posure are being published, in effect, to subsidize the possible failure of the Big Book. If the also-rans become popular, it's gravy. It’s a windfall. But the publisher isn’t breaking his neck to make everything he prints a bestseller. He doesn’t have to worry about a point spread, in any sense, because for every huge bet he makes, he also makes a dozen or a hundred guaranteed bets. In racing terms, it’s a walkover. He can’t lose. Unless he does something terribly stupid, which has been known to happen. Who else has money riding on a book? The author’s agent, whom I should have discussed before the editor. Actually, however, the agent isn’t making a bet. The agent invests a little time and a little money, but the author pays for that eventually. Whatever risk the agent takes (and, try as I might, nothing in that area comes immediately to mind) is passed on to the author. The agent stands to gain if the book is a big success, because the agent is going to collect 10% (or in some cases 15%) of every penny it earns. But the agent can’t lose anything but postage and time on the phone. The bookstores have a bet to make, too. I've bypassed the vicious little world of salesmen and distributors, because it’s just too ugly. I'd rather go right on to the stores, where, at least on the surface, there’s some semblance of rational thought. But even that is an illusion. The big chains, Waldenbooks and B. Dalton, have more power than anybody to make or break a book. They can’t, of course, stock every title published in the U.S. They have their own methods for determining which books they’ll give shelf space, and which will languish ouside in the snow. If my book makes Dalton's list, then it will be in all five hundred-odd Dalton stores. It has a chance in the marketplace. If I don't make the list, then I'm a Dickens orphan looking through the frosty window at the rich kids having their Christmas goose. The bookstore’s bets are hedged, just as the publisher’s. The bookstores can return books. It seems that the further we get from the author's typewriter, the less risk anyone is willing to take. And at the same time, those people are making the largest margin of profit — "winnings.” I suddenly realized that if betting on football games was sucker's trick, then writing for a living ranks somewhere with believing you're Napoleon on the scale of delusion. The trick is to own a chain of stores like Dalton’s; if you can’t do that, then be a publisher, and if you can’t do that then be an agent. Being an author is like being the first brown leaf into the trash bag. Well, that was not what I was going to say. It was kind of a sudden digression, but it cleared up a lot of things for me. Okay. What I meant to say next was that ultimately the final bet is placed by you. The reader plunks down $2.50 or $3.00 (or in the case of my hardcover, fifteen dollars. I was shocked when I found out it was going to cost so much. I called my editor and complained. Most hardcover sales go to libraries, all of which are notoriously short of funding. I thought the cover price would cut drastically into my sales. But then I was reminded that everybody else’s hardcovers had the same kind of price. It didn’t soothe me very much) and bets that he’s going to get a couple of hours of entertainment in return. I wonder how often he wins that bet. Some readers are entertained very easily; they don’t have to study the books (and the point spread here is represented by the blurbs and cover paintings) very long. More discriminating audiences take into account the author’s performances. But still, it seems to me that if a reader picks three winners out of three books, he's doing very well. He ought to get some kind of prize or reward. He ought to be given a job as an editor. I was going to go further, extending the metaphor (bring¬ ing in such football realities as timeouts and injuries and inten¬ tional grounding, and relating them to the writing of a novel, but the Percodan wore off just in time). Instead, I think I’ll relin¬ quish the floor and put on the radio. This afternoon I have Tulane over LSU, Pitt minus six over Penn State, and Ten¬ nessee minus seven over Vanderbilt. We’ll see how I do. — George Alec Effinger, November, 1981 Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 23 THE THRUST AWARDS: 1980-81 RESULTS The Results of the First Annual Thrust Awards have been tallied, covering science fiction and fantasy of the years 1980-1981. The Thrust Awards are the only awards in the field instigated to bring recognition to the most disappointing and worst SF and fantasy perpetrated annually. The Thrust Awards drew a grand total of 11 ballots this year. That may not seem like many— in fact, it isn’t many. It does assure, however, that next year's response will improve. Apparently, many of Thrust’s hundreds of subscribers fell to sleep reading last issue and never woke up. I would like to thank those of you who did vote. This issue will contain the ballot for our Second Annual Thrust Awards for 1982. THRUST AWARDS (1) MOST DISAPPOINTING NOVEL (30 Nominated) #1 The Number of the Beast by Robert Heinlein 21 pts. # 2 Valis by Philip K. Dick 10 pts. #3 The Changing Land by Roger Zelazny 9 pts. #4 God Emperor of Dune by Frank Herbert 8 pts. # 5 The World and Thorin by Damon Knight 7 pts. The Many Colored Land by Julian May 7 pts. # 7 The Visitors by Clifford Simak 6 pts. #8 The Magic Labyrinth By Philip Jose Farmer 5 pts. Operation Misfit by E. Hoffman Price 5 pts. The House Between the Worlds by Marion Zimmer Bradley 5 pts. #11 The Snow Queen by Joan Vinge 4 pts. The Shadow of the Torturer by Gene Wolfe 4 pts. A Cold Wind from Orion by Scott Asprin 4 pts. Survey Ship by Marion Zimmer Bradley 4 pts. Split Infinity by Piers Anthony 4 pts. Others nominated: 3 points: Ringworld Engineers by Niven, Waves by M.A. Foster, Lord Valentine's Castle by Silverberg, Tomoe Gozen by Salmonson. 2 points: Hitchhikers Guide to the Galaxy by Adams, Yearwood by Paul Hazel. 1 point: Project Pope by Simak, Smile on the Void by Stuart Gordon, Space Mavericks (a series) by Mike Kring. Nominated but ineligible: A World Between by Spinrad, The Dark Design by Farmer, Macrolife by Zebrowski, The Avatar by Anderson, JEM by Pohl. Comments: Heinlein was the clear winner. The Dick novel placing second was somewhat of a surprise. Only the first eight received a vote from two or more voters. In total, 55 votes were spread over 30 books. (2) MOST DISAPPOINTING COLLECTION (15 Nominated) # 1 Proteus, edited by Richard McEnroe 23 pts. #2 Expanded Universe by Robert Heinlein 11 pts. #3 Orbit 21, edited by Damon Knight 10 pts. # 4 Annual World’s Best SF (1981), edited by Don Wollheim 7 pts. #5 The Last Defenders of Camelot by Roger Zelazny 6 pts. #6 Unfinished Tales by J.R.R. Tolkien 5 pts. Out of the Everywhere by James Tiptree, Jr. 5 pts. #8 The Best SF of the Year#10, edited by Terry Carr 4 pts. Amazons, edited by Jessica Amanda Salmonson 4 pts. Bug-Eyed Monsters, edited by Pronzini & Malzberg 4 pts. #11 Interfaces, edited by LeGuin and Kidd 3 pts. The Barbie Murders by John Varley 3 pts. #13 The 13 Crimes of SF, edited by Asimov, Greenberg & Waugh 2 pts. #14 Best SF Stories of the Year #9, edited by Gardner Dozois 1 pt. Nominated but ineligible: Last Dangerous Visions, edited by Harlan Ellison. Comments: New anthologist McEnroe managed to win this category by a large margin. (I can’t comment on what writers helped Richard win this honor, since whoever publish¬ ed the anthology must have been too embarassed to send Thrust a copy!) Two veterans with major reputations, Heinlein and Knight, came next. Seven of those nominated received votes from two or more voters. The rest of the list includes 3 best-of-the-year anthologies (a surprise), 4 author collections (all top name authors) and 4 anthologies, mostly reprint, most by big names. (3) MOST DISAPPOINTING MAGAZINE (10 Nominated) # 1 Isaac Asimov’s Science Fiction Magazine 29 pts. # 2 Analog 21 pts. # 3 Omni 17 pts. # 4 Galaxy 10 pts. # 5 SF Digest 8 pts. Amazing/Fantastic 8 pts. Galileo 8 pts. # 8 Twilight Zone 6 pts. # 9 Ogre 5 pts. #10 The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction 1 pt. Comments: Difficult to judge these results; the three best¬ sellers are the three most disappointing. The top two, Asimov's and Analog, are known as having a recognizable style of stories most common to that particular magazine. At the other end, F&SF is known only for having stories of high literary value. Although editors of both Asimov's and Analog deny it, apparently many sfill think there are typical ’’Asimov's stories” and “Analog stories” and don’t like them. (4) WORST DRAMATIC PRESENTATION (15 Nominated) # 1 Flash Gordon 30 pts. # 2 Scanners 18 pts. #3 Clash of the Titans 1 3 pts. # 4 StarTrek— The Motion Picture 8 pts. # 5 Battle Beyond the Stars 7 pts. Black Hole 7 pts. Outland 7 pts. # 8 The Martian Chronicles 6 pts. # 9 Altered States 5 pts. Close Encounters of the Third Kind 5 pts. Others nominated: 3 points: World War III; 1 point: All Harlan Ellison Records, Buck Rogers, Battlestar Galactica and Tarzan. Comments: Once again we have a clear winner with Flash Gordon being nominated by seven voters. Scanners and Clash ot the Titans were the only other two movies garnering widespread dislike. The high placing of Star Trek is probably based on disappointment rather than actual low quality, based on the number of low-budget efforts which placed even lower. Only one TV presentation {The Martian Chronicles) placed in the top ten. In all, only nine presentations drew more than one vote. _ _ Page 24 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 .REVIEWS DOOKS,ETC. FRIDAY by Robert Heinlein (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 368pp., $14.95, 1982) (ISBN 0-03-061 51 6-X) Fifteen years ago, the announcement of a new Heinlein novel would have been greeted with universal joy and anticipa¬ tion. But during that fifteen years, Heinlein’s fans have suf¬ fered through a series of rambling, ill-conceived lumps of prose masquerading as novels— culminating in the execrable The Number of the Beast. So it was with grim resignation that I opened Friday and began reading. The first surprise was the superbly economical opening paragraph (which contains a nod toward fellow Thrust writer Charles Sheffield): As I left the Kenya Beanstalk capsule he was right on my heels. He followed me through the door leading to Customs, Health and Immigration. As the door con¬ tracted behind him I killed him. For contrast here is the opening of The Number of the Beast: " He’s a Mad Scientist and I'm his Beautiful Daughter." That's what she said: the oldest cliche in pulp fic¬ tion. She wasn’t old enough to remember the pulps. The thing to do with a silly remark is to tail to hear it. I went on waltzing while taking another took down her evening formal. Nice view. Not foam rubber. The second surprise took a bit longer to realize. The book is consistently entertaining, well-written, bristling with invent¬ ion, and satisfyingly (if a bit cornily) ended. None of the above characteristics have been evident in anything the man has writ¬ ten in fifteen years. Friday is a book that comes as a deep and very welcome (well. . .almost) surprise. Friday is an artificial woman. She was created in a lab, but is indistinguishable from “born” people. By profession she is a combat courier, but she doesn't know if she works for a ten¬ tacle of the government or (more likely) a division of a multina¬ tional corporation. The opening chapter is a headlong dash around the globe as Friday eludes pursuit; leaves behind a trail of corpses; gets captured, raped and tortured; escapes intact; and reports in. Along the way the reader is treated to a myriad of wonderful little ideas and thoughtlets. While holed up with new-found friends in Canada, Friday learns of Red Thursday. This is a carefully timed series of assassinations and sabotage that threaten to unravel society. Three conflicting groups claim responsibility. Friday spends the rest of the book in an episodic journey across the land¬ scape of delightfully Balkanized North America. One of Heinlein’s great strengths in his earlier works was his ability to create a detailed and convincing milieu without endless explanation. He dropped tightly focused fragments of information into the narrative that gradually accreted into an over-all picture in the reader’s mind. Friday shows him utilizing this technique at peak form. The various empires, countries and principalities that north America has become are all in¬ teresting and penetratingly delineated by means of items such as Friday’s problems with her credit. Yet, as much as I enjoyed reading the book, it missed be¬ ing one of Heinlein’s best by a large margin. My objections fall into two categories; both are themes that have hagridden Heinlein’s talent over the past decade and a half like one of his own Puppet Masters. They are sex and politics. Once again Heinlein is presenting us with the sexual at¬ titudes of a repressed thirteen year old boy’s vision of utopia. All of the important characters are very smart and highly sexed. They hop into bed with each other constantly, in groups (preferably) or in rapidly changing combinations. The sex act itself is not described, but is referred to coyly and bracketed by pseudo-sexy quips that tend to raise the gorge. In the course of the book, Friday becomes emotionally involved with three separate groups of four or more people, not to mention a hand¬ ful of one-night stands. I get the impression that if all of the characters were to gather in one room, they would fall on each other in a squirming pile and quickly forget who was who. These similar proclivities among the cast point out another perennial problem with Heinlein. All of the characters talk the same; they are all the same person — the Horny Competent. The politics are more subtle, but no less juvenile. The book reflects Heinlein’s own weird brand of Anarchic Fascism: “I’m a rugged individualist, completely self-sufficient, and I also know that I’m one of a small group of capable people that keep the world running while the billions of cattle out there are doing their ignorant best to fuck it up.” It’s as if Ayn Rand had spent ten of her favorite formative years surviving by her wits while lost in a jungle. Fortunately, the sex and the politics are much less dwelled-upon than in previous books. Just as the reader begins to fidget, the author swings the plot into an entirely new direc¬ tion. Friday is an odd sort of sequel to a 1949 novella, “Gulf.” “Gulf” had an odd genesis. Someone wrote a letter to Astound¬ ing in 1948 ’predicting’ the contents of an issue one year in the future, down to title, author and brief description of story. Editor Campbell decided to commission all those stories, and he ran the November 1949 issue exactly as predicted. "Gulf was Heinlein’s predicted story. Friday’s boss is Kettle Belly Baldwin, the “Boss” character from “Gulf.” Friday also contains genetic material from Joe Greene, that story’s protagonist. At one point she Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 25 contemplates a lunar crater left behind by the events in “Gulf” that lead to Joe Greene’s death. For the past dozen years, a stubborn group of Heinlein apologists have been laboriously rationalizing their Emperor’s lack of clothing. Well, I am overjoyed to report that the Emperor has finally reclothed himself. If not in the ermine- trimmed robes of yore, at least the man has put on a new pair of jeans and a clean T-shirt. — Steve Brown THE TRANSMIGRATION OF TIMOTHY ARCHER by Philip K. Dick (Timescape Books, 1982, 255pp., $15.50) (ISBN 0-671-44066-7) No SF fan has looked forward to seeing the last book of Philip Dick. Yet, in that there had to be a last book by Dick (something that I can't help thinking Phil was quite conscious of), I think that The Transmigration of Timothy Archer is indeed worthy of being Philip K. Dick’s last novel. Dick continues in this novel to investigate the conse¬ quences of entertaining too freely the plethora of metaphysical concepts available to those who search for them. In many ways, this is one of Dick’s clearer visions, one of his novels least subject to diverse interpretations. Unlike many previous books, Dick gives little effort to questioning whether reality may indeed be ruled by laws and concepts understandable on¬ ly, if at all, by strange metaphysical theories. There is little question that this is the story of the tragic life of a man who was too willing to believe anything momentarily in his frantic search for truth. This novel will be widely compared to Dick’s last two novels, Valis and The Divine Invasion, which share this novel's theme but not its approach. It will also be compared to the non- sf Confessions of a Crap Artist, since the Archer book, in con¬ centrating on the character of Timothy Archer and associates, spends less time questioning the nature of reality, neglects the recognizable trappings of SF and fantasy, and will therefore be considered by many to be Dick’s second non-genre book. But I would argue that The Transmigration of Timothy Ar¬ cher is indeed science fiction, or speculative fiction if you prefer. It is an SF novel in which the subject of speculation is not the hard sciences of physics or astronomy, not the life sciences of biochemistry or biology, nor even, to any large degree, the “soft” sciences of sociology or psychology; in¬ stead the speculation involves the softest "sciences" of all, theology and philosophy. Timothy Archer could just as well (but less effectively) have been an astrophysicist too readily accepting, and later rejecting, dozens of bizarre and unsup¬ ported cosmological theories. It is unnecessary to recommend this book. All those familiar with a lifetime of work by Philip K. Dick (albeit a much too short lifetime) will read this novel, and I’m sure that most will be disapointed only that this is the last book we will see from one of SF’s greatest authors. — Doug Fratz WORLDS: A NOVEL OF THE NEAR FUTURE by Joe Haldeman (Viking Press, 1981, 262pp., $12.95) (ISBN 0-670-78984-4) Haldeman is, of course, the author of The Forever War and Mindbridge. I enjoyed both books, and so did a lot of other readers. At that time in his life, Haldeman had a war story or two to tell, and he used SF in doing it. He has won the Hugo award, as well as the Nebula award, and deserved them both. Since then, however, Haldeman has run out of war stories to tell, and his fiction has suffered for the difference. All My Sins Remembered was a weaker book than his previous two, and his two Star Trek novels(Planet of Judgment and World Without End) were hardly serious contenders for best novel of the year, or even best Star Trek novel of the year. With these three books, Haldeman has taken a step backwards as a serious sf writer. I therefore approached Haldeman’s newest novel with some trepidation. Now that I've read it, I’m certainly not sorry— the book is well written — but the pace is so slow. One has a tendency to throw the book into the corner and forget the whole thing; good God, if the near future is this boring we're in for real trouble. I think that part of the problem is Haldeman’s fixation on sex. Worlds isn’t a novel about the near future, it’s a novel about sex in the near future. Sex, sex, sex ... it can get to be a real drag. Trust me. Plot Outline: The year is 2084. Thousands of people live on astroids in Earth orbit — called “Worlds". Earth itself is over¬ crowded and is reaching its saturation point with regards to various categories of pollution. The crime rate (especially rape) seems to be high. Marianne O’Hera, a political science student on one of the larger Worlds settlements, travels to Earth to do post-graduate study. She gets involved with the “Third Revolu¬ tion”, which is a group of underground activists who want to make a few changes in the system, and her involvement results in her getting kidnapped (and raped, of course). Sounds exciting? Thought provoking? It’s just dull. Very dull. — David Pettus MINDKILLER by Spider Robinson (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, Sept. 1982) The basic story buried in Mindkiller is not a bad one. It is derivative and pointlessly resolved, but has its moments. Un¬ fortunately, the author has seen fit to inter the book under heaping mounds of hyperbole and melodrama. When everyone screams, sobs, laughs uproariously or agonizes at all times, empathy and perspective vanish. Here is a passage describing nothing more traumatic than mental frustration: . . . / swore, spun the chair around, hugged myself, and folded over until I hit the floor. My mouth was wide open, my teeth clenched tight, my forehead knotted, and I snarled softly in the back of my throat. When I could, I pounded the rug with my fist and wept. Let me call your attention to that second sentence. It’s worth repeating: “My mouth was wide open, my teeth clenched tight ...” When writing at the top of one's lungs, one achieves the awesomely silly. The book consists of two entwined stories set in 1994 and 1999. Norman (1994) is a college professor despondent over a broken marriage. We meet him as he is being saved from suicide. When his mysterious sister comes to visit, and promp¬ tly vanishes, the plot swings into motion. Joe (1999) tells his story every other chapter. He is a pro¬ fessional thief who lives in an absurd dream hideout under an abandoned warehouse. He chances on Karen while she too is suiciding (a popular activity for Robinson’s characters). Joe nurses her back to health for extended passages that recall, almost note for note, the substance of Sturgeon’s “Slow Sculpture.” Karen was suiciding with a wire in her pleasure center, blissfully starving to death. The only new aspect to this situation (which was handled economically and with far more impact in Larry Niven’s "Death By Ecstasy") that Robinson adds are some lengthy and fairly unpleasant descriptions of the effects of malnutrition. The novel hangs on coincidence and poor logic at almost every turn. One quick example of each: The chief bad guy is Swiss, and runs a Swiss company. Yet he just happens to be in residence at his mansion located conveniently near Halifax, where most of the novel takes place. Not only is he nearby when one character is hunting him, but also when another one hunts him, five years earlier. As for logic: The bad guy has done something horrible to Joe’s mind long before the story opens. He has done this at great expense. The he monitors Joe for five years. Yet his only motive in doing all this seems to be that he wants Joe’s approval for what he is doing (‘ruling the world’ utilizing unpleasant methods). This was too much for one of the book’s characters, who exclaims: “What the hell he does for you that was worth all the trouble you took, I can’t for the life of me figure out.” Page 26 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 By the time we reach the last forty pages, it is revealed that Norman and Joe are the same person ! As this fact is telegraphed by the time we have met “both" of them, I have on¬ ly ruined the “surprise” for the dimmest of readers. It takes a great deal of skill to bring off the alternating flashback/forward structure of this book. Robinson does not yet have this skill, and the structure got out of control two- thirds of the way through. By then, both Norman and Joe are wandering around the same part of Canada, on the same mis¬ sion, hunting for the same man in the same house. It became necessary to flip back and reread preceding chapters to keep straight who was going where, with whom and when. To com¬ pound it, the last two chapters are both 1999, breaking the pat¬ tern and turning the resolution into a kind of boring puzzle. There is some effective writing in Mindkiller. The dialogue is good, the minor characters are varied and interesting and the sex scenes are handled well and in an adult manner (using the literal definition of the word). Robinson has undeniable talent. But apparently someone got to him early and told him that he had to bleed copiously on every page if he was going to be a good writer. Thus the incredulous reader is under constant bar¬ rage from bloated sentences like: “You didn’t need to catch Norman Kent between the eyes with a million-pound shitham- mer more than thirty or forty times before he got the message." For a book filled with death and tragedy, I spent a lot of time chuckling. Robinson’s histrionic overkill ultimately trivializes everything. By the time we hit one of the big revelatory lines like: “If I am mad, the human race has had it.”, the chuckles turn to snickers. My favorite aspect of this book is that it is so easy to parody: You mean you’re SOLD OUT OF HERSHEY BARS!?! and he fell to the floor, muscles spasming, his tongue wedg¬ ed in his throat, torso quaking with rhythmic convul¬ sions, toes curling into his armpits, drool pooling in the small of his back beneath his slackened mouth. —Steve Brown TINTAGEL,' by Paul H. Cook (Berkley Books, 1981, 210 pp., $2.25) If this first novel is what we can come to expect of Paul Cook, then we have another fine novelist to add to our ranks. Tintagel is a well-oiled combination of classical music, philosophy, and action-adventure all set within the larger framework of an alternate-worlds story. To set the stage: in the 21st century a mutant bacterium has gotten out of hand and in¬ fected nearly every person on the planet. Called Liu Shan’s Syndrome, the disease is triggered by a combination of emo¬ tional instability and music; the music because of its intense universal appeal mesmerizes susceptible listeners, draws them magnetically into intense individual fantasy worlds depending on the mood of the afflicted and the type of music itself — so much so that people are literally sucked into their own real, newly created universes, *pop*l Francis Lanier is a Stalker— one of very few with a resistance to Liu Shan’s Syndrome, one who can come and go at will into the Heavens or Hells of those who have disap¬ peared, for purposes of retrieving them. He is the best (of course), and handles only top priority cases: military upper echelon, VIPs, even the first woman President of the United States, who, it happens, is up to her neck in riots, impending economic armaggedon, and a wildly growing number of import¬ ant disappearances from those needed to run the ailing coun¬ try. Written with sensitivity and obvious knowledge of music and the deep-seated role it plays in the daily existence of all people everywhere; clearly delineating the symbiotic and sometimes metaphysical interfacing between Man and Music, Cook leads us to an appreciation of, or perhaps reaffirmation of, the force of music in our lives. And, the solution Cook offers at the close of the story, that of total escape into a paradise of Lanier’s own device when Earth is beyond repair, seems more than valid. It isn’t cor¬ ny, or cheap, or a cope-out. If the best of all possible worlds was available for the taking, why shouldn't we avail ourselves of it (not to pair ’best’ with ‘perfect’ necessarily)? I recommend this book and can only wonder slightly why Berkley decided to promote the book as they did (or didn’t, in this case). The cover is innocuous; low-key and cliche blurbs fail to excite any desire to pick-up-the-book and check it out — in short, though this is a novel by an unknown, a higher promotional profile was in order. — David Truesdale OUTWARD BOUND by Juanita Coulson (Del Rey Books, 371 pp., 1982, $3.50) “Soap opera” is usually a derogatory label. Yet, Upstairs, Downstairs, Dallas and The Waltons all have the basic soap opera format. Nevertheless, to combine this genre with science-fiction takes a good deal of audacity. This book is the second in the Children of the Stars series, a family saga with all of the trappings of the soap opera. I must admit that I had some misgivings about the first book, Tomorrow’s Heritage, and the staying power of a conti¬ nuing saga about a 21st Century family. However, I find that Outward Bound is much more powerful and effective than the first. The Saunder dynasty grew out of a multi-national corpora¬ tion and as the book opens, the third generation is exploring the possibilities of a faster-than-light drive to the stars. Con¬ tact has been made with intelligent aliens who possess their own FTL drive, but they are not really willing to share it with humanity, figuring that they should do it on their own. Brenna Foix Saunder and Morgan Saunder McKelvey are two cousins who are determined to produce such a drive at whatever cost. Brenna’s fiance Derek Whitcomb has totally given up on the idea after being an early promoter of the scheme. The loss of life caused by the explosion of Prototype I and the political op¬ position have caused him to favor the long slow method of us¬ ing a hiber-ship, where the crew would remain in stasis for 75 years before reaching their destination. Another cousin Stuart Saunder has become an alcoholic and is violently opposed to going beyond the home planet. There are suspiscions of sabotage after Prototype II is destroyed in a harrowing acci¬ dent that cripples Morgan for life. Brenna is no quitter, and she determines to press forward whatever the odds, even though she is in danger of ending up like her cousin. This book is much more fast-paced than the first and the characters stand out as personalities. It takes place in the year 2075, and there is enough time lag between the first and se¬ cond volume to allow the reader to indulge in some specula¬ tion and extrapolation about the events that occurred in- between. I found this novel most enjoyable and am glad to see the series gain a solid footing. It is well worth your time and atten¬ tion. — W. Ritchie Benedict SCIENCE FICTION STUDIES IN FILM by Frederik Pohl and Frederik Pohl IV (Ace Books, 1981, 346 pp., $6.95) (ISBN 0-411-75437-6) Frederik Pohl IV has teamed up with his father to write a movie reference volume geared to anyone who enjoys reading, for instance, Bill Warren’s chatty and informal news-and-review feature in Fantasy Newsletter (formerly in Science Fiction Review), and who likes to know about horror and science fiction film-related news, behind-the-scenes technical know-how, on¬ set anecdotes, special effects, and the producers and planners involved in the suddenly mushrooming (since Star Wars) business of big budget (and low-budget) "sci-fi” flicks. Most of the major SF films are examined in this critical study, and the tools the authors use for their dissections often entail directors’ quotes, copies of letters, producers' memos, writers’s first person anecdotes, and similar sources. For example: they go into why Star Trek: The Motion Picture was Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 27 laying so many eggs, even before it was produced; how long it took for the special effects wizards of King Kong to stage the peeling off of Fay Wray’s clothes— a scene cut later by censors; how George Pal’s script for Destination Moon was delivered over the transom — from Robert A. Heinlein; how The Day The Earth Stood Still is actually based on Harry Bates’ story, “Farewell to the Master”, which ends with someone apologizing to Gort for killing its master, to which Gort replies, “You misunderstand, / am the master ”; etc. etc. A few of the movies discussed are Metropolis, A Clockwork Orange, The Andromeda Strain, Forbidden Planet, as well as many lesser-known works. In addition, numerous black-and-white photos (mainly selected from Forrest J. Ackerman’s film collection) highlight the text. One gripe: as a reference volume, Science Fiction Studies in Film contains no index. In a 346-page illustrated fact-filled book, an index seems called for. Otherwise, recommended highly for the SF buff. —John DiPrete THE SCALLION STONE by Canon Basic A. Smith (illustrated by Stephen Fabian) (Whispers Press, 1980, 148 pp. signed edition: $25.00, trade edition: $12.00) This book is a less for writers. Canon Basil A. Smith, you see, suffered from what I call the Emily Dickenson Syndrome. Dickenson published only four or five poems in her lifetime. She didn’t even try with most of them. There are, I am convinced, a lot of writers like that out there. I’ve met some of them, people whose work is perfectly good, even superior, but unpublished because they never quite got around to it. What often happens is that the writer dies, and somebody says, “I think it would be respectful to burn the deceased’s paper.” Exit one potential career. How often this happens, we can quite literally never know. But once over this initial hurdle, the going still isn’t easy. The deceased’s papers may molder in a trunk forever, none of their heirs being able to appreciate them, much less market them. Keep that in mind the next time somebody extolls the virtues of the “amateur” writer. Only once in a great while is the writer lucky enough to have friends who can actually do the job. In the case of Basil A. Smith, an English cleric who died about ten years ago, it was fortunate indeed that he happened to be a friend of the distinguished political writer and fantasist, Russell Kirk (A Princess of All Lands, The Surly, Sullen Bell, Lord of the Hollow Dark), who steered the five tales in this book toward publication. One appeared in Stuart Schiff's first Whispers anthology. The rest appear here for the first time. A very exciting event, one would hope. Was the book worth doing? I’d say yes. Was Canon Smith a long-lost master of the ghostly tale? Probably not. Another problem with writers who work only for their own amusement is that they seldom get much practice, let alone feedback from someone who might know more about the art than themselves. As a result, all of Smith’s stories, while they have many virtues, also have some fairly gross faults which any competent editor could have gotten him to fix. In short, the stories don’t quite come off. They don’t quite make sense sometimes. There are loose ends. One the plus side, Smith was a very good stylist, and deft at building atmosphere. He wrote in the traditional English manner of Machen or M.R. James, slow-moving, very reserved, arriving at the climax by the most round-about route. The expected scholarship is there, the bits of arcane lore, the snatches of old- fashioned English life. In fact the life is sufficiently old- fashioned that any one of these stories could have been written in 1890, save for an occasional mention of a truck. (Uh, excuse me, lorry.) If you like this sort of thing at all, you will be glad to find something new available at last, not fake, but genuinely a product of the millieu and mindset which produced the tradition¬ al English ghost story. At the same time you might wish that the promised climax in “The Propert Bequest” had actually been delivered, rather than occurring offstage, or that Saint Cuthberts demon #5 in the title story had some discernable motivation, both for its actions, and for going away at the end. The best story is probably "The Bishop’s Room," which has all Smith’s strengths and the least of his failings. The illustrations by Fabian are among his very best, and there is an introduction by Russell Kirk. The signed edition is signed by those two, of course, unless Stuart has a special ectoplasm edition available to a very exclusive clientele. The edition itself is of the highest quality, handsome and made with the best materials. Barring certain prophecies of Ray Bradbury coming true, copies will be around for centuries. I can only hope to be published in an edition like this before I die. — Darrell Schweitzer BOOKS OF NOTE ■■■■■■■■■■■■ Doug Fratz GENE WOLFE’S BOOK OF DAYS by Gene Wolfe (Double¬ day, 1981, 182pp., $9.95) A collection of minor, miscellaneous Wolfe stories; a mixed bag including many of his Orbit-style, literary experiments, with the results often being somewhat questionable. FOOTPRINTS ON SAND-A LITERARY SAMPLER by L. Sprague and Catherine de Camp (Advent: Publishers, Inc., P.O.B. A3228, Chichago, IL 60690) A well put-together and deserved tribute to the de Camps, featuring both fiction and non-fiction by them. ELFQUEST, Book 1, by Wendy and Richard Pini (Starblaze, 1981, 160pp., $9.95) A cute and colorful fantasy comic strip for the young and young at heart drawn by Wendy Pini, whose style has remained virtually unchanged since she first began drawing comic strips (as Wendy Fletcher) about 15 years ago. STEPHEN KING’S CREEPSHOW, art by Berni Wrightson (New American Library, 1982, 62pp., $6.95) Five insipid horror comic strips, all too stupid to be scary, representing the worst of the stories of the EC horror comics of the early 1950's. I am not looking forward to the upcoming George A. Romero film of the same name. Could there be two Stephen Kings? UP TO THE SKY IN SHIPS/IN AND OUT OF QUANDRY by A. Bertram Chandler and Lee Hoffman (NESFA Press, Box G, MIT Branch P.O., Cambridge, MA 02139, 1982, 176pp., $14.00) An absolutely lovely double edition of stories by Chandler and articles and fiction by Hoffman, with covers by Kelly Freas, in honor of these three as Guests of Honor at Chicon IV (World SF Convention). _ _ THE LAST CASTLE by Jack Vance (Underwood/Miller, 239 N. 4th St., Columbia, PA 17512, 116pp., 1981, $20.00) A beautiful, large-sized edition of Vance's award-winning story of 1966, illustrated by Alicia Austin. THE NEW VISIONS, introduction by Frederick Pohl (Doubleday, 1982, 87pp., $14.95) A small collection of color sf art from the last few years, valuable primarily for the short biographies of the artists, which apparently were written by Doubleday’s editors. FRIDAY by Robert A. Heinlein (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1982, 368pp., $14.95) Heinlein’s best book since The Moon is a Harsh Mistress, and guaranteed to be 90% free of the self-indulgent drivel to which we have been becoming ac¬ customed. LAUGHING SPACE, edited by Isaac Asimov and J.O. Jepp- son (Houghton Mifflin, 1982, 521pp., $17.95) Either my sense of humor doesn’t match up with Asimov and wife, or there really haven’t been many sf stories that have been both funny and good. THE COOL WAR by Frederick Pohl (Del Rey Books, 1980, 278pp.) A funny and engaging romp through the 2020’s which I enjoyed a great deal. THE BEST FROM FANTASY AND SCIENCE FICTION, 24th Series, edited by Edward L. Ferman (Scribners, 1982, 311pp., $14.95) Asimov, Dick, Varley, Budrys— the best of Fer- man’s F&SF matches closely with the best work being done in the field today. Page 28 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 BLUE ADEPT by Piers Anthony (Del Rey Books, 327 pp., 1902, $2.95) Good sequels are not easy to do. Whether a book or a movie, the author or scriptwriter faces the problem of attempt¬ ing to tie up any loose ends that were left dangling in the original, some about which he may have long since forgotten. In some instances, it is much easier to create an entirely new novel 'that just uses the framework or the outline of the original. It is doubly difficult with this book, as Anthony was embarked on a peculiar hybrid experiment: the marriage of pure fantasy to the conventions of science-fiction. In Split In¬ finity, the first book in this series, it appeared to work quite well; in Blue Adept, it still works, but there are some signs of strain. In the first book Stile, the main character, grows up in a decadent high technology world named Proton where magic does not work, and the aristocracy uses serfs to play in com¬ puter games for entertainment. He meets a female android named Sheen who helps him leave his own home world for a parallel world named Phaze, where magic does work, which is populated by a variety of fantasy creatures ranging from cen¬ taurs to werewolves. Stile finds that the only reason he is able to cross over is because his counterpart— a very powerful magician known as the Blue Adept — has been murdered. He has to learn quickly how to survive as well as pick up some spells in the process. In Blue Adept, Stile is madly in love with the Lady Blue in his new world, even though, because she is an aristocrat the love appears to be unrequited. The identity of the Blue Adept’s murderer remains unknown. It is a matter of vital concern to Stile as he has taken the late lamented place, and he is a lot weaker having just started to learn the ropes. He returns to his home world of Proton where he is constantly in peril. He not only has to locate the Red Adept who is trying to kill him, but has to contend with the sudden discovery of a counterpart to Lady Blue in the high-tech home world. There is Knock-down drag-out fight with a Dragon-Worm which can regenerate itself from two halves on his return to Phaze. Finally, there is a con¬ clusion where he has to fight a duel with the Red Adept on his home ground. If the ending appears abrupt, it is because this is the second book of a trilogy. The new book is just about to ap¬ pear in hard-cover and will offer a bang-up climax (if it is not part of a quadrilogy or quintilogy, that is). I have always preferred science-fiction to fantasy, and found those sections situated in Proton more interesting. However, the fantasy sections are well-written and will appeal to fantasy readers. Mr. Anthony is to be commended for daring to try something different. Certainly, with his well-developed sense of humour, he appears to have enjoyed writing these books, and that feeling comes through. As light reading, this book is a worthy successor to the first. It will be interesting to see what the next has in store as the advertising promises some horrendous crisis that will threaten both Proton and Phaze. Not a perfect book by any means, but still a cut above the average run-of-the-mill. — W. Ritchie Benedict THE SUNDERED REALM by Robert Vardeman and Victor Milan (Playboy Press, 1980, $2.25) (ISBN 0-872-16732-1) The Sundered Realm is male-viewpoint sword-and-sorcery, a pleasant farrago of nonsense in which all the women are young, beautiful, and extremely willing; the hero is heroic, but enough of a common man for easy reader identification; wizards, evil sorcerers, and wonders abound; and two young-and- beautiful princesses are warring for the throne. (And in one in¬ stance, whoring). The details are colorful and exotic, although at bottom familiar, and there is a good deal of humor of the low- comedy sort, most of it revolving around the most cheerfully repulsive ghost to ever pinch a student’s bottom on the sly. Fost Longrider, courier, is hired by one wizard to carry a sealed jug to another wizard, who quite promptly turns up dead and surrounded by monsters to be slain. Moriana, whom we know from the blurb to be the Chief Good Guy and rightful heiress to the throne, drugs our hero’s sled dogs, tries to rob him, attacks him, tells a transparent lie as a cover, and promptly melts into his arms in an explicit sex scene, lovingly detailed. Nobody suggests that this is a cowardly way out of taking some well-deserved lumps; one doesn’t accuse the Heiress to the Throne of whoring or cowardice, although armed robbery seems to be honorable enough. The jug contains the spirit of Erimenes the Ethical, who in life preached abstinence from all worldly pleasures (if that’s what this culture calls ethical, no wonder they accept robbery, cowardice/whoring, etc. without a murmur) and is now heartily sorry. He urges his companions into danger so that he can see the blood flow, get off on their sex, and in general is a bigger pain in the butt than C3PO could ever be. He also has the secret of immortality, which was well known to his people. Who have all died out by the time of the story. That’s what Moriana wanted and that’s what her evil twin Synalon wants. (You heard me. Synalon. Sounds like a drug rehabilitation program, or else the latest from DuPont. Synalon has usurped the throne, instituted a repressive crackdown, claimed it was necessitated by her sister’s evil deeds; and the people believe her implicitely, leaving one to wonder where the truth lies. Not for long, for we see and hear Synalong carrying on like the Wicked Queen of Acne on the Saturday morning Tarzan car¬ toons. The way she is described, green three-inch fingernails would come as no surprise. She also sleeps with guardsmen by the half-dozens, and considering our hero's taste for brothels, this makes them kindred souls; not that he sees it this way. I guess one is not supposed to turn men into sex objects, although why not? Surely this is one of the privileges of royalty? I ON THE REFERENCE SHELF by Douglas Fratz PKD — A PHILIP K. DICK BIBLIOGRAPHY, compiled by Daniel J.H. Levack (Underwood/Miller, 239 N. 4th St., Colum¬ bia, PA 17512, 1982, 158pp., $7.95) An excellent and timely reference on the life’s work of Philip K. Dick, finished while he was still alive, but current enough to be an almost definitive reference. A must for all fans and readers of Dick. THE NESFA INDEX TO THE SCIENCE FICTION MAGAZINES AND ORIGINAL ANTHOLOGIES-1981 (NESFA press, P.O.B. G, MIT Station, Cambridge, MA 02139, 60pp., 1982) Since 1951, the NESFA index has been one of the most useful and affordable sf references in the field. Indexed by author, title and edition/issue. A READER’S GUIDE TO FANTASY by Baird Searles, Beth Meacham and Michael Franklin (Avon, 1982, 216pp. $2.95) Searles, et al, now have produced a fantasy version of their SF reader’s guide a year or two ago. Useful primarily as a reference for novices. (Interestingly, it is stated that Harlan Ellison is “generally thought of as a science fiction writer”. That should make Harlan happy.) TWENTIETH CENTURY SCIENCE FICTION WRITERS, edited by Curtis C. Smith (St. Martin’s, 1981, 642pp., $65.00) An exhaustive reference work which includes a biography, com¬ plete bibliography and critical essay on virtually every notable sf author, including foreign language authors and some major fantasy authors. An extremely valuable, if expensive, volume. KEEP WATCHING THE SKIES! by Bill Warren (McFarland & Company, Box 611, Jefferson, NC 28640, 1982, 467pp.,. $39.95) Excellent write-ups, with a few selected stills, of all of the numerous SF movies made from 1950 to 1957. Recom¬ mended to SF movie fans, if you can afford the high price-tag. (This is listed as Volume 1, so further volumes covering later movies can be anticipated.) Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 29 didn’t hear the royal guard complaining. So Longstrider and Moriana, separately, invade a baroque city in the clouds serviced by hot air balloons powered by fire elementals; Longstrider gets a ride on one, sneaking into the city that way. Moriana is promptly arrested; Longstrider promptly runs into the local pro-Moriana Underground. Including a beautiful young counsellor’s daughter (he has a hangup about nobility) who falls into his arms in a lovingly-described sex scene, male viewpoint all the way as they all are, but really rather nice, and easy to skip if you’re more interested in the story. Moriana is tortured; not in person, but by putting the screws to everyone she ever cared for in front of her eyes. Since she holds out, the next step is to throw her to a huge and ugly statue of a demon to be raped and devoured; Longstrider and the Under¬ ground manage to prevent the latter but not the former (he was too busy watching. But the authors seem to be aware that such a thing would hurt, if not that it would have permanent scars; in this they’re a bit more sensitive than some.) And they ride off into the sunset, fight one last battle, and ride off again side by side. It’s a fun book if there’s nothing on TV and you can spare the $2.25. It has some nice touches. It moves fast and has plenty of color. Synalon is out of the stereotype bag, telling everybody in blood-curdling accents how they’d better not cross her; one wonders if Moriana would be any less of an absolute monarch. The sex is preposterous, but then, this is fantasy, and by Playboy Press at that. Synalon’s announcement that she was going to look for sex partners from the kennels was hilarious, and a nice indictment of the men of the city. But it’s fun to read— once. — Pat Matthews YOUR NEXT FIFTY YEARS by Dr. Robert W. Prehoda (Ace Books, 1980, 348 pp., $2.50) (ISBN 0-441-95221-6) Futurology is now getting more popular. Certainly, there is nothing at all wrong with keeping an eye to the possibilities “Breaks new ground in Tolkien criticism . . . a well-written and closely argued exploration of what in Tolkien’s youthful reading, religious beliefs, and professional career contributed to the special character of The Lord of the Rings. ... I have read it with much pleasure and intellectual excitement.” _ — Richard C. West llYVWS Author of Tolkien II \\ P Criticism: An *!!,EK Annotated Bibliography "ENGLAND And ALWAYS %0qms(WcM of the Rings Jared Lobded (Editor, A Tolkien Compass ) Paper, $4.95 before us. Indeed, social and cultural change is taking place so very rapidly that we can no longer wait until a problem slaps us in the face to begin searching for a solution to it. It pays to look ahead, anticipate problems and begin considering solutions so that answers will be available when they are needed. Perhaps we would do well to consider Alvin Toffler’s con¬ cept of “Anticipatory Democracy” before it is too late. Perhaps. Years ago the Club of Rome released their scenario for the future, titled Limits of Growth, in which we learned that civiliza¬ tion was a zero-sum game that could not be won— the popula¬ tion explosion, energy crisis, increasing pollution, food shor¬ tages, ecological imbalances and depleting natural resources would all work together, eventually, to result in worldwide downfajl. In the literature of futures research all of this has been named “the Megacrisis”. The ultimate crisis that will undermine our every effort to stay afloat and survive as a technological civilization. However, the Club of Rome report is most assuredly too pessimistic. Numerous futures groups and think-tanks have suggested that all is not lost. There will certainly be many pro¬ blems to confront us in the future, but they need not destroy us completely. Dr. Robert W. Prehoda’s Your Next Fifty Years is more op¬ timistic. It is, in fact, a bit too optimistic. Prehoda doesn’t see any problem in beating the Megacrisis. We’ll beat it, and in fifty years time be living in a utopia so wonderful that no one will remember how rotten things used to be. Prehoda conceptualizes a “live and let live” society. To quote: “It is a society that has adopted a new ethic concerning the purpose of human life on earth. That ethic: our ultimate goal is to promote the greatest happiness and progressive development for an optimum number of individual humans on a planet with a diverse variety of stable ecosystems— supported by a solar-system-wide civilization.” Well now, that’s a really great idea. . . but do you see it hap¬ pening in fifty years? One-hundred years? Two-hundred years? I don’t. And neither does Dr. Jerry Pournelle, who wrote the for¬ ward for the book. Though Pournelle is willing to accept the technological advances that Prehoda writes about, he is unwill¬ ing to accept” . . . th casual way that Prehoda has the world turn sensible”. If Prehoda really believes everything that he writes then I fear he is going to be terribly disappointed in the year 2029. Technology certainly changes, but people are more resistant to change. It’s' unfortunate, but true. All of this is not to say that prehoda’s book is not worth the reading; it is interesting speculation, and if nothing else Prehoda has reminded us that there is a need to look ahead. Prehoda says that socio-cultural change always follows a linear pattern that goes from (1) problem, to (2) crisis, to (3) catastrophe. If we do not face the problems ahead then they will surely become a col¬ lective crisis that will lead to the Club of Rome’s Megacrisis, and catastrophe for America. Read the book and make up your own mind. — David Pettus THE EXPERIMENT by Richard Setlowe (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1980, $10.95; Science Fiction Book Club, 1980, 277 pp., $3.50) Harry Styles is a happily married man with three fine children. He is dying of lung cancer and has no hope of living for more than a few months. Then a brilliant scientist named Dr. Karl Steinhardt approaches Harry and tells him about an artificial gill that has been developed; theoretically, a gill transplant could mean little to Styles in the way of extended life. At the very most he would live long enough for researchers to determine that gill implants might be a realistic alternative for oceanographic re¬ search and development sometime in the future. It has always been Harry’s ambition to be the “first” at something important, and so he consents to experimental surgery. Styles’ lungs are re¬ moved and gills are implanted. If you have ever wondered what it would really be like to breath under water, then you should immediately get a copy of Setlowe’s book. Harry Styles is a fine character study, and Setlowe should be proud of the work that he has done making Styles a living, breathing (water breathing!) human being. Styles Page 30 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 giiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiimiaiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiifimiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiiiMiiiiiiiiiiic THE 1HRUST/4WARDS BMLOT: 1982 Rules of Eligibility: All books first released in 1982, all dramatic presentations premiering in 1982 and all magazines with one or more issues published during 1982. Only current subscribers to Thrust-Science Fiction in Review are eligi¬ ble to vote. Voting will be tallied as follows: 5 points for first place votes, 4. for second place, 3 for third, 2 for fourth, and 1 for fifth place. All ballots must be received by April 31, 1983. Send to Thrust Publications, 8217 Langport Terrace, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20877. All subscribers submitting completed ballots will receive on back issue of Thrust of his or her choice free. Definitions of Categories: (1) Most Disappointing Novel: The SF or fantasy novel of 1982 whose quality fell most below the expected; expectations may be due to author’s previous work, author’s reputation, a publisher's publicity or even critical acclaim. (2) Most Disappointing Short Fic¬ tion Collection: The SF or fantasy short fiction collection or anthology, original or reprint, published in 1982, whose quality fell most below that expected. (3) Most Disappoint¬ ing Magazine: The SF/fantasy fiction magazine whose quality of fiction was most disappointing, taking into ac¬ count budget constraints, previous history and other fac¬ tors. (4) Worst Dramatic Presentation: SF or fantasy theme which was the worst in terms of quality. □ I am a current subscriber to Thrust. □ I am not a Thrust subscriber; subscription money is enclos¬ ed ($9.00/6 issues). □ Please send me free Thrust back issue # _ (issues #5, 8-18 are available). Name: _ Address: _ City: _ State: _ Zip: _ is just another guy, like you or I, with many of the same dreams and fears, and it is Styles’ constant adjustment and readjustment to drastic changes that makes The Experiment worthwhile reading. First there is the acceptance of death, for Styles knows that he will die of lung cancer. Then comes the experiment that to the great surprise of everyone involved, is a total success; and Styles must adjust to the fact that he can never again walk on land and breathe the air. He becomes alien¬ ated from his family, and so begins to think of himself as a kind of superman. Media coverage is a part of the problem in that Styles begins to believe everything about himself that he sees and hears on television. And he very nearly determines that he is no longer a part of humanity; no longer a man with a soul. No longer a man. The technical detail is quite good. Setlowe has done his homework with regard to past and current research on artificial gills. The writing is above average and plot development is brisk in pace. The book is fun to read! Once you have begun reading you will not want to stop. —David Pettus ONCE UPON A GALAXY: A Journal of the Making of THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK by Alan Arnold (Del Rey, 277 pp„ 1980, $2.75) When you think of the precise attention to detail Lucasfilm gives every stage of its endeavours, it’s hard to understand how this curious book came to be. One could guess that British film publicist Alan Arnold was chosen, as Empire’s unit publicist, to write the journal of the 1) MOST DISAPPOINTING NOVEL D _ 2) _ 3) _ 4) _ 5) _ 2) MOST DISAPPOINTING COLLECTION D - 2) _ 3) - 4) - 5) - 3) MOST DISAPPOINTING MAGAZINE D - 2) - : - 3) - 4) - 5) - 4) WORST DRAMATIC PRESENTATION 1) - 2) _ 3) _ 4) - 5) _ film's making because he is an old-line publicist, thirty years in the business, who has worked with the likes of Monroe, Minnelli and Michael Caine. He could be relied upon to apply seat to chair and get the job done. (The Star Wars’ publicist never did get his making-of volume written.) But Alan Arnold was, in all other respects, the wrong man for the job. He is singularly humorless. He has never read, nor felt any empathy or enthusiasm for science fiction. Fantasy, to him, beings and ends with Alice in Wonderland. Even when it is explained to him, the vocabulary of optical effects— holdout mattes, rotoscoping, elements, loss of definition through optical generations— is beyond his efforts to understand. (Most of the fans buying this book should be way ahead of him already, considering the growing effects sophistication of American audiences.) This lack of understanding hampers Arnold, but his lack of empathy muddies matters even more. He never seems happy with what he is doing. (He confesses in a Postscript that he has never felt the film industry or the people working in it particularly glamorous.) At times he cannot help expressing his— "con¬ tempt” would be too strong a word— for the whole trivial exer¬ cise he feels Empire to be. He continually asks actors and director if they don't feel they are puppets and puppeteer with no opportunity to ply their art. “Can you truly say you believe in The Empire Strikes Back in the way you must have believed in Loving, A Fine Madness, or The Eyes of Laura Mars?” he asks director Kershner. After get¬ ting an affirmative reply, Arnold persists, asking, “Isn’t there an Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 31 i WE GOTSP NUWS! _antasy neuJsLette RAT'S MAW, FLORIDA — This is Voltaire Sanskrat and here is the news. The denizens of today's inner landscape will surface in "Boca Raton" for 12 moons this year, jostling for a place in the pages of FANTASY NEWSLET¬ TER, a journal of news and commentary. Led by their high priests — such august fantastists as Fritz Leiber, Harlan Ellison, Karl Edward Wagner and Gene Wolfe, these strange beasties coordinate blast offs from Cape Boca every month. Stephen Fabian, Hank jankus. Real Musgrave, Val Lakey, Michael Morrison, David Willson and other professionals are on hand to capture the festivities for art lovers and posterity. Enlightened explorations of the arts, the very latest in news, books, magazines, personalities and reviews offer an alternative to the depressing political economics of pedestrian newsreportage. Up to the millisecond views on the contemporary Quest for MEANING from the friendlies in Boca Loca (Washington or Moscow it is'nt) , will make you FORGET CBS and TRY FNL. This FANTASY NEWSLETTER invades mailboxes the first of every month for just $18 a year (second class mail), a week or ten days earlier for $26 (first class). You'll get the advance scoop and that's no poop. TAKE US FOR WHAT WE SAY. How can you doubt the most trusted alien in America? Hy-j a year (12 issues , second class; $27 jirst class mail, U. S. and Canada; $26 surface , $40 airmail overseas, Europe.) Winner of Six Balrogs and The World Fantasy Award Here’s my hardearned $ _ for a one year subscription. Send it to: City _ State _ Zip _ Mail to Fantasy Newsletter, 500 N.W. 20th St., Boca Raton, Florida 33431 element in all this of you saying, Til get this bestseller done and then do the things I really want to do?’” Arnold can never bring himself to accept that intelligent adults can take science fiction or space fantasy seriously. He comes away from the 37th WorldCon (SeaCon) with the understanding that sf is “multicolored covers depicting lurid shapes and machines." When some unauthorized Empire stills surface in the U S. and Arnold is told what blackmarket prices they bring, he hurries to a British dealer in movie memorabilia to be reassured. “We tend to be a lot less fanatic than America's West Coast about these things,” he is told. British collectors go in for stills from the ’20s and ’30s, stills with archival value. “It will be a long time before Empire stills achieve archival value," Arnold declares. Despite his biases and blindspots, Arnold does offer us some things of value in his book. Through one 20-page se¬ quence, he fastens a remote microphone to Irvin Kershne’s lapel and records the dialogue between director, actors and crew as they work through the. conflicts and annoyances that arise in getting one day’s filming done on the carbon freezing set. He also gets almost 40 pages of good interviews with George Lucas, as well as pages of interviews, less revealing, with all the stars and many of the technicians from the film. Once Upon a Galaxy: A Journal of the Making of THE EM¬ PIRE STRIKES BACK lacks the intimacy, insight and humor of Bob Balaban’s Close Encounters of the Third Kind Diary or Walter Koenig’s Checkov’s Enterprise. For some good informa¬ tion and a chronology of the filming of The Empire Strikes Back, however, it is worth adding to your library of books on filmed sf. -Bill Glass THE OLD GODS WAKEN by Manly Wade Wellman (Doubleday Science Fiction Book Club Edition, 1980, 186 pp. $2.98.) Manly Wade Williams has been writing science fiction, fantasy, and mystery-suspense novels for almost forty years now. He is a respected teller of weird tales, and has won the World Fantasy Award. The Old Gods Awaken is another one of Wellman’s Appalachian stories of the supernatural, which stars a mountain fellow named Silver John and an interesting cast of characters who become involved with a couple of Old World druids who are attempting to reawaken evil spirits that sleep at the summit of Wolter Mountain. Silver John is Wellman's well known “wonderer-hero”, who has appeared in many mysterical adventures already, though this is the first Silver John novel- length saga to see publication. The language, and by that I mean the down-home manner in which Wellman tells the story, is a bit difficult to adjust to at first, if you’ve never read earlier stories, but quickly works to keep the reader involved in the character development and plot- line. It becomes, frankly, quite fun to read the book because of the manner in which the story is told. Wellman relaxes the reader with all of the mountain talk, and then sprinkles the story with strange creatures from Indian folktales, sorcery, and intellectual trivia. I am convinced that Wellman does a tremendous amount of research before writing a novel of this nature, and I respect that kind of craftsmanship. Very much so. The Old Gods Waken is a delightful excursion into dark fan¬ tasy. — David Pettus Mow THIS is WHAT 1 Coimter-Throsts LETTERS A.J. Budrys As nearly as I can figure it out, 824 Seward Street the Thrust of Rich Brown’s Evanston, IL 60202 essay (in Thrust #18) on my review of The Many Colored Land turns somehow on the question of who is or is not a fan, how many fans there are, how many kinds of fans there are, and what the right kind of fan is. A helpful clue seems to appear in the contention that there are only a few hundred fans, all engaged in writing, publishing, or drawing for fanzines; not a word about reading them, reacting to them, or interacting with other people on the basis of what’s in them or on mutual in¬ terests originally born of SF. And of course, not a word on anything not related in any way to fanzine fandom. Well, could we just stipulate that Rich Brown is the Bestest fan of all, and get that out of the way? He claims that the thrust of my review is “that there is a difference between 'fans’ who write sf and ‘professionals’ who do the same.” This is different from what I thought the thrust of my review was, as one might gather by reading the P. 37 foot¬ note in my October, 1981, F&SF column: “In SF generally, the distinction between the amateur and the professional is far more often than not a distinction between career-choices, not in talent or skill.” It’s right out there, in italic type. More to the point, I think, is Rich Brown’s basic idea that I somehow said that only fanzine fandom exists and that only deliberate influences, via fannish journalism, condition the way SF is written. (I think that’s his basic idea. The essay doesn’t parse out well for logic on this and other points. I particularly liked his “correcting” my definition of “mundane” by adding superfluous dependent clauses to it.) If that is what he thinks, I can hardly blame him for wondering how someone as percep¬ tive as his good old friend “A.J.,” whoever that is, could have arrived at so hamhanded a formulation. In my opinion, the thrust of my review was that fandom, in its many forms, by nurturing many pros (inside and outside of fanzine fandom) during their formative years, and by maintain¬ ing an articulate community which confers praise that translates into rewards from publishers to writers, influences the way SF is written. Does anyone here doubt that? The best thing to do, of course, would be for someone to read my review, and relay its contents to Rich Brown. How about you, Mr. Fratz? Rich Brown replies: Amusing how, rather than respond to my minor nit, Budrys attributes attitudes to me I did not express. His F&SF com¬ ments were apparently delivered ex cathedra, beyond mere mortal dispute; I can understand why my quibble unleashed sarcasm (in lieu of wit) but wonder if I must now leave the Pro¬ mised Land? Budrys made some astute comments on the influence fan¬ dom's had on the way sf is written via its members becoming professionals. I felt his point was blunted when he cited Judy May and her book as an “apt example” because he’d said, “From 1940 until quite recently, [fandom] was the source of new SF writers, artists, and editors, who typically first served an apprenticeship in the very large and proliferated Fannish amateur publishing establishment . . .” (second emphasis add¬ ed) Judy May never served such an apprenticeship. (If I wrote about sf pros, said they were “typically” Caucasian and cited Chip Delaney and/or Sumtow Sucharitkul as an example of what I was talking about, would someone correct me?) My im¬ pression was that A.J. — whoever he .is — made specific points about this narrow area of fandom. This was not based on that quote alone; remarking on how many fans turn pro, he said: “It is more nearly as if... the island of’ Trinidad traditionally fostered nearly all the writers who would supply the next generation of all writing for English-speaking people everywhere.” Given the few hundreds involved in fanzine fan¬ dom at any one time, this seemed an apt apology. Now he tells us he really meant “fandom, in its many forms” — or, as he said in his review, the “tens of thousands, ranging in age from the single-digit numbers on up through Nonageria” — in which case he should have said these writers would be supplied by the population of New York and its five boroughs. This may not be quite as remarkable as the other, but at least it fits the numbers. It seems, in whatever alternate universe Budrys received THRUST, I said he said only fanzine fandom exists and only deliberate influences via fannish journalism condition the way sf is written. Meanwhile, over in this continuum, I cited his mention of everyone from convention fans to fanzine subscribers — and wondered why, after he made distinctions, he misapplied them. Did I say “not a word” about those who read, react to or interact with others on the basis of what’s in fanzines or on anything not related to fanzine fandom? I recall saying everyone from F&SF’s readers to fanzine fans are “fans” unless one obviously restricts the definition. It seemed — I am in error, the words must mean something else— some restriction might be implied by saying these fans-turned-pro "typically” first served a fanzine apprenticeship. I'm now at a loss to say what they really mean — but if Budrys will provide a lexicon or handy-dandy guide to let us know which of his words have specific meanings and which are semantic mush, I think we might be able to procede from there. Where A.J. has a period in his “quote,” I went on to say: “ — fans preserve the fannishly preferred icons, others do not — and that this is demonstrated by the book since May is ‘a fan of long standing.'” (In its entirety, I think it an accurate summary.) The quotes around “fans” and “professionals" (as they do around “quote” in this paragraph) indicate the distinc¬ tion is not necessarily meant; this was underscored by the use of “fans/others” in the part he cut so he could make his cute lit¬ tle comment. In any event, the Willis piece I quoted at length made the same point (albeit better). I read Budry’s review in the (apparently mistaken) belief he was trying to construct a logical argument — rather than throw¬ ing a random hodge-podge of ideas onto the page which were unrelated to each other (and therefore not anything we, the readers, were supposed to connect). It might be best to view future Budrys writings with this in mind; I submit no better place could be found to begin applying it than in this response. Page 34 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 If he just misunderstood what / wrote, I would take the im¬ plied criticism and strive to improve. But in more than one case, the difficulty seems to lie in Budry’s inability to understand what he said — or perhaps in his ability to redefine it as the situation dictates, I'm not sure which. It it’s the latter, we’ll have to accept it as one of his foibles; if the former, I frankly don’t know what to do or suggest to add to his ability to “parse the logic” of what I said or what he wrote. But if he finds it im¬ proves his comprehension to move his lips while he reads the words, then by all means he should do so. [Since A.J. himself invited me to take part in this some¬ what lengthy dispute, I will indeed, and attempt in doing so to have the last word. I found Budry's column in the October 1981 Fantasy & Science Fiction, dedicated solely to using May's The Many Colored Land to illustrate some points regarding fans and their effects on sf literature, extremely contusing on first reading. Also on second reading. In fact, I am still somewhat confused, and think that the exact words contained in that column may present less of a clear, precise, and logically pulchritudinous argument than A.J. remembers. However, after a great deal of further thought, I think I now see some of the ideas Budrys was attempting to proffer to the readers of F&SF. I think the distinction he was trying to make between "fan" and "pro" writers of sf is actually that between those writers who write sf because they enjoy science fiction, and those who write sf because they enjoy (or need to) write. The former are quite often fans who have spent a great deal of time among others who like sf, whether in fanzine fandom, convention fandom, or local fan clubs. The latter may be characterized by the fact that if sf were to cease to be a viable commercial market, they would immediately, with varying degrees of regret, turn to other forms of writing. (Those of us who are "fans" of course would, in this event, begin creating a noncommercial marketplace for the genre.) However, many of those writers in that latter category also have been fans, and many still are. This would include Asimov and Ellison, Pohl and Silverberg, and even Budrys himself. It is love of writing itself, above and beyond a love for this genre, that makes these writers less subject to serve up homilies on the maxims which Budrys apparently feels are characteristic of the "tan" sf writer. Unfortunately, only a few examples are given by A.J. of these half-baked aphorisms which he feels characterize "fan" sf writing, far too few for me to be able to test his hypothesis. But now you’ve gotten me interested, A.J. Who are these "fan" writers (other than May) and what does distinguish their work from that of less inbred sf writers? — DF] Mike Glicksohn The Sheffield article on the 137 High Park Avenue Gor books was fascinating Toronto, Ontario, CAN M6P253 reading. I’m one of those who has never completed ^Gor novel although I once read almost half of one in preparation for meeting John Norman at a small Toronto convention I was also a guest at. This was four or five years ago and at the time all I knew about the series was what I’d read about in fanzines and that mostly dealt with how sexist the contents were. I was somewhat unprepared for just how awful the actual writing was and I simply couldn’t finish the book. But I looked forward to seeing the inevitable confrontations between John Norman and the militant feminists I was sure would be there in droves to attack him. Those confrontations never took place. If there were any militant feminits there they stayed well hidden. Norman him¬ self turned out to be a sincere, soft-spoken, erudite and quite charming professorial type who was a delight to talk to as long as you didn’t get into the rationale behind the Gor books when it became obvious that he actually believed that women were like the women in his books. And the strangest thing of all was that after he gave a long talk about the world of Gor and how the books came about, by far the majority of those who enthu¬ siastically surrounded him for autographs and additional dis¬ cussion were young attractive women in their late teens and early twenties. The man may be a crank but he certainly knows his market and while I cannot but deplore his vision and his literary “ability” I can’t help but admire someone who recog¬ nizes a need and grows rich filling it. I didn’t see the original Budrys piece but I appreciated Rich Brown’s reply. Personally, though, I found “The Many Colored Land” a somewhat turgid novel and not at all the work of a “fan” writing sf. I’m even surprised to discover that Julian May was a fan since I’d never heard of her myself. Rich puts his finger on the core of the matter, though, when he points out that Budrys uses the words “fan” and “fandom” to mean at least two different groups, but that’s something we all oc¬ casionally do, trusting to context to make clear exactly which group we’re referring to. Obviously A.J. didn’t make himself clear but I think Rich has answered him pretty thoroughly. Good piece. Also enjoyed Mike Connor of rejection slips. Entertaining writing as well as some perceptive comments on the little devils themselves. Somewhere in my accumulation of fannish paraphernalia I have the one rejection slip I ever received, from FANTASTIC, along with the acceptance of the same story. I’ve only ever submitted one manuscript to one publisher and it was accepted but since I mentioned to Ted White that I was sending it to him to start a collection of rj’s he included one with his return letter. I figured why foul up such a complete and perfect record so I’ve never written or submitted anything since. Andrew Offutt Ah, this time you go too far, The Funny Farm thou undiscriminating bigot! Haldeman, KY 40329 W.R. Benedict’s rave review of Robert Forward’s Dragon’s Egg, I mean. While I appreciate Forward’s science articles im¬ mensely and have said so again and again, the “novel” is little different, except that it is not as well written. The writing is dreadful, in fact, and unedited to the shame of the publisher. Minimal linguistic skills and pitiful overuse of beginners’ phrases and cliches assaulted my sensibilities so strongly that it was a struggle to read twenty pages. I was appalled the whole time. God, what a good book it might have been if he had col¬ laborated, or if an editor had helped — had edited! After twenty pages I knew it was impossible and tried skimming. The writing — not the book, not the plot; the mis¬ application and rending of English prevented even that. I put it away, sorrowful and revolted that it had been hyped so, and that no one had helped it. Niven knew, I noted; his on-book comment was guarded. I really can’t understand the kind of review Benedict wrote, in mostly good Amer-english, with no mention of the author’s pitiable writing. With the cessation of the teaching of grammar and the swelling of “like” to an all-purpose blurt, does the writing no longer matter? Are we to love it all, whether it’s crafted or merely slop-slapped down with scores, hundreds of uses of “then” and “like” and sentence-beginning (backing negatively in!) “But” and absolutely mechanical, beryllium-stiff characters? Readers deserve better and so does sf. Books that are Science fiction and accepted, even hyped despite their incom¬ petence of prose, only feed the contemptuous attitudes of serious reviewers, scholars, and readers. Thrust's readers deserve more competent and honest reviews. We can’t prevent publishers’ hyper-pushing of such books as this and the dread¬ fully written Urshurak, but darn it we can tell each other, warn each other! For good science and sf ideas for your notebooks read Forward’s articles, and Asimov’s, and Pournelle’s, and Gene Bylinsky’s superb book Life in Darwin’s Universe. And now, after a year of silence, I’ve been goosed to say it at last. That's a shame. Now my favorite science popularizer can hate my butt, rather than one of those creatures with the hugeness of ego to “review” the work of others, creators, and to tell the truth about its insurmountable faults. What i meant to do, darn it, was keep silent. (Dishonest, but so far I have never gained the arrogance to perpetrate a review. A few ap- Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 35 preciations and warnings, that's all.) It’s just that this “review” insults me and the good and well written books available to us all. Those of Hal Clement, for instance, or of Charles Sheffield, whose writing skills keep im¬ proving while he keeps educating us with superb oletime prob¬ lem-story Science fiction, as well. I have to and love to read those people; they teach me — when I can read their prose. Darrell Schweitzer There’s not much to be said in 113 Deepdale Rd. response to Benje Wannover’s Strafford PA 19087 letter in THRUST 18. I refuse to drop down to his level. I suppose that if he had an extensive record of publications, I might take him seriously, but since he is not, to my knowledge, a writer at all, I don’t see how he could possibly know if writing can be taught (or learned) at a workshop. Successful people who come out of such workshops think it can. They offer as proof the fact that they participate in such workshops, then find themselves able to sell stories. Three novels and some fif¬ ty stories later, it looks good from my perspective. As for the matter of Lovecraft and syphilis, the theory was presented by David H. Keller in an essay called “Shadows Over Lovecraft," published in FANTASY COMMENTATOR in 1948. The idea was later refuted soundly by Kenneth Sterling. Keller’s argument was that the preoccupation with hereditary degeneration in Lovecraft's fiction sprang from the fact that he had contracted the disease prenatally. Lovecraft’s father was a travelling salesman & had plenty of opportunities to pick it up. However, there is no evidence to suggest that this was the case. Mike Conner doesn’t seem to have realized that getting the truth from an editor may be very helpful indeed, if for no other reason than it helps one judge the individual editor’s tastes. Mike is a good writer and he’s had a degree of success already; he can run his own career however he likes. I’ve always found that I prefer the editor to be explicit. Sometimes, even if he clearly doesn’t want the story back, he’ll say something which will enable me to improve the story before I send it elsewhere. Most of the would-be contributors to IASFM wanted to be told. We used to get a lot of mail thanking us for taking the time, when no one else would. Now George gets a couple let¬ ters a week from people saying how they miss his criticism. (Actually that of his staff. We all wrote it.) When you’ve been on the editorial end, and you see a writer nursed along from barely competent to clearly publishable, and then the writer begins to produce clearly publishable stuff all by himself, then you know it’s worth it. Patricia Mathews Has Charles Sheffield ever 1125 Tomasita St., N.E. seen the comedy skit “Free Albuquerque, NM 87112 Amazons of Ghor?” Some of Marion Zimmer Bradley’s friends wrote it, and put it on every year at the Fantasy Worlds Festival. It’s a classic. I sat down to imagine what a GOR book would be like if written by a woman from the viewpoint of one of the slave women. Suzy McKee Charnas has already done it with Walk To The End Of The World. GOR is a runaway best-seller; Charnas is excoriated in the pages of other magazines as an extremist and a man-hater who would have to be crazy to make that all up. But it’s the same world, all the same; just seen from the underside. If there really were a feminist mafia, where were we when Science Fiction Review — which accepts Gor, “Spartan Planet,” and Geis’ own “One Immortal Man” without question — went into screaming fits over a Joanna Russ book because a female secret agent, suddenly discovering that her supposed partner has the right to pull her ID’s every time he thinks she’s getting out of line - and has done it - kills him in a classic Clint Eastwood weapon-on-the-floor fight. “Because he wasn’t feminist enough,” an SFR reviewer opined, proving he either missed the point entirely, or didn't read the book himself. The first person who writes a GOR book with sexes reversed (and only Jessica Salmonson could probably do it) would have to sell it to Diana Press or something. Tiptree’s been around a while and has seen social trends come and go since WWII. “Women Men Don’t See” is unforget¬ table. “Houston, Houston, Do You Read,” was criticized on the same ground that the Russ book was, probably justifiably, but again, where was everybody when “The Mysoginist" came out? Women blame women, men blame women, and somehow the worst horror anyone can imagine is a woman committing violence against a man. Not that most of us would ever want to. Except when there’s a rapist or a child molester running around loose. Does Gor have a human life cycle? What about the children the slave girls bear? What about daughters? What about the mothers of the male lords? Are they, too, treated like dogs? A rare thing for a primate society! Or are they set apart from the other women? Made overseers perhaps? A Gor book that addressed these questions seriously would be fantastic! H.W. Hall Regarding your comments on 3608 Meadow Oaks Ln. The Science Fiction Refer- Bryan, Texas 77801 ence Book and Anatomy of Wonder, I was surprised to see you gloss over AOW so lightly. SFRB is an excellent an¬ thology, with some fine contributions, but it is not a “Reference Book” in the normal sense (some contributions do provide reference level information, to be sure). I would judge AOW to be the book for the scholar/critic, or the serious reader/collector, and would concur with your judgment that fans would appreciate SFRB more. The writer would find both useful; depending on his needs on a given occasion, one might serve better than the other, but need isn’t predictable enough to recommend one over the other for a writer. The issue, as usual, makes me wish Thrust was a monthly! [I seem to be the only reviewer to think that Anatomy of Wonder had some notable weaknesses (it was nominated for a Hugo), and that The Science Fiction Reference Book is a superior reference book. — DF] Richard A. Lupoff Thank you for the copy of 3208 Claremont Avenue Thrust tt 18. The whole issue is Berkeley, CA 94705 pretty damn good — anywhere between interesting and fas¬ cinating as one goes from section to section. Naturally I was in¬ trigued to see what Andrew Andrews would have to say about What If? Volume 2. And was most grateful for his kind opinion. As the What If? book represents my personal second- guessing of past Hugo votes, a lot of readers seem to have made a game of second- (or, I suppose, third-) guessing me. Well, that’s all to the good, and I’ll even confess to having had some further thoughts about some of my own selections, after- the-fact. Andrews seems to be calling for some sort of objec¬ tive criteria, or at least verbally formulated criteria, for what I consider a “good” story or a “best” story. Alas! I have none. My reaction tends to be visceral and to an extent mnemonic. That is, some old stories that made a great impression on me when I first read them become automatic candidates for in¬ clusion in What If? But just being a candidate doesn’t get anything in, all by itself. There’s much re-reading and there’s much new reading, even of old stories, that I happened to miss first time 'round. Well, a recent irony: The mailman recently brought me a clipping of the Publisher's Weekly review (actually, preview) of What If? volume 3. PW pretty much loved the book. The very same mail delivery contained a letter from my editor at Pocket Books, David Hartwell. Dave informed me that he was pulling Wl?v3 from the Pocket Books schedule because the series has been selling so poorly. I later learned from Dave that he had also pulled the next-due volume of New Dimen¬ sions and a short-story collection by Theodore Sturgeon. Page 36 Thrust — Science Fiction in Review Winter/Spring 1983 Of course, collections and anthologies have always sold less well than novels, but lately they are just about dead. I don’t think I’m being paranoid to attribute this to a lingering after¬ effect of the notorious Elwood Affair of the 1970s. There had- been a limited but reasonably healthy market for anthologies until Jowly Roger came along. He personally overloaded the market with far more books than it could absorb. And exacer¬ bated the situation by turning out a generally abominable level of quality. The anthology field suffered a collapse from which it has yet to recover. . . Hartwell recently said this to me: “I can buy a first novel .for a minimal price from a totally unknown, entry-level writer— and publish that book with no particular fanfare or sup¬ port— and it will sell better than a collection of stories by a well-known, established author.” So— whaddaya think of that? I hope that David is able to work two or three more volumes of Wl? into (or back into) the schedule. Don’t really know how much good it would do, but it might help if people who enjoyed the first two volumes of What If? either urged their local bookstores to pester the Pocket Books sales rep for 3 and 4. . .or sent letters directly to David Hartwell at Pocket Books asking him to reschedule #3 and #4. (His ad¬ dress is c/o Pocket Books, 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020.) Brian Doherty Really enjoyed the latest P.O.Box 24120 issue of Thrust, despite the Jacksonville, FL 32217 absence of Ted's column (my favorite) and the depressing news that Thrust is only going to be coming out twice a year from now on. Well Thrust is being (semi) neglected in a good cause; best of luck with your continuing education; keep on stretching those horizons! Your comment about the field needing a magazine like Thrust started me to thinking: What exactly do you view Thrust as? I subscribed to it through The Comics Journal, and in it it was advertised as “The Comics Journal of the sf world” or somesuch. Well, Doug, I really do like the zine and all, but that really ain’t true. Thrust doesn't begin to approach the scope of TCJ in its handling of the field. Your size prevents you from covering sf as well as Groth & Company approach comics. You used to write for them; you should know. Sf is certainly more worthy of the Journal’s style of critical approach than the comics field is. I think making Thrust over into more of Journal style would be good for the zine’s financial health. I like Thrust, I really do, and it’s certainly th best magazine of its sort, so you can consider this a delayed backlash to discovering that Thrust really wasn’t The Comics Journal of SF. And I sometimes wish that Gary Groth were an sf fan instead of a comics fan, but. . . [The ad comparing Thrust to Gary’s' TCJ was placed several years ago in an attempt to attract TCJ readers who, like you, are also sf fans. The comparison was meant to be between the no- holds-barred, iconoclastic tone of both Thrust and TCJ, not the comprehensiveness of the coverage of our respective fields. For those of you unfamiliar with The Comics Journal, for which I wrote for a while in 1976, it is a monthly magazine which now sells 5 to 10 times as many copies as Thrust, publishes more material in most months than I do in 2 years, and is the most literate of the magazines in the comics field by an order of magnitude. But the sf field is much more used to high quality — I doubt I could equal Gary's success with $10,000 and working full time! — DF] Rich Brown Charles Sheffields’s piece is 1632 19th St., N.W., #2 the most thought-provoking Washington, D.C. 20009 in the issue for my money. Not merely does he ask why Gor books sell but whether their popularity in fact says something about sf fans. I am inclined to think the people who read Norman’s books aren’t simply sadists, if only because I find it uncomfortable to believe the emotional cripples who follow the Marquis have increased their numbers by such a degree. But I throw this out for consideration: Male/Female relationships are becoming increasingly complex — and have been doing so since the beginning of the industrial revolution. I can’t "blame” women’s liberation for these complexities, since I sincerely believe women in our society have been exploited and therefore agree with most of women’s liberation’s prin¬ ciples and goals— but I don’t think women’s lib has as yet done a lot to make male/female relationships easier. Well, nobody — or nobody with any sense — ever said life was sup¬ posed to be easy. I do think the complexities which women’s liberation has added to these relationships are a temporary thing — temporary until people at last come to terms with them, which is what’s necessary to make life livable for both men and women. My point here is that the appeal of Gor books may go beyond sadism to the fact that the acceptance of these sado¬ masochistic roles at least appears to simplify these otherwise complex relationships. While these roles may have uncommon appeal for those who are already emotional cripples, they may also have some appeal to the shy, the introverted, the men who look more like Alfred Hitchcock than Robert Redford, the women who look more like Elizabeth Taylor now than Elizabeth Taylor 25 years ago, and/or those who have little or no ex¬ perience in interpersonal relationships. In the slave worlds con¬ structed by Norman, it’s not necessary to "break the ice” or work at a relationship, to compromise or devise the rules of give-and-take, to be either physically or emotionally attractive, to care about each other or grow as individuals or be bothered by such matters as the mutuality of consent or desire. A slave (female in Norman’s mythology) "gives” herself by accepting abuse while the master (male in Norman’s mythology) "takes” by accepting all the physical pleasures as his "natural” due. The very narrowness of the parameters of these roles may be what makes them attractive to some people— particularly if they are fantasy roles accepted by both parties. The question this leads to is whether or not John Norman’s fantasies are as sick as fantasies as they are as non¬ fantasies. Is a person likely to be harmed by reading them? Is it likely that reading them will make their reader want to act them out? If they do act them out, will they be “pretend” (with both parties taking on “roles”) or will they be “real” (with one party taking on a role, while the other is actually being forced?) Is there as much psychological damage in the one as in the other? Or is it possible that a person predisposed to use force will find sublimation in reading about it which will make the real-life use of force seem unnecessary? I’m not well-versed enough in psychology to know the answer. I’ve never read a Gor book— I’ve only seen what’s been said about them, mostly in fanzines but usually with substantiating quotes. This has been sufficient to convince me Norman isn’t giving voice to my sex¬ ual fantasies. (Mine are actually much worse, involving, as they do, immersing my sex partner in egg whites.) Regarding Grant Carrington’s article in Thrust #10, 1 agree with most of what he sayfe but I would quibble with him when he makes the mistake of trying to draw parallels between writers and musicians— and, a little later, between writers and athletes. I’m not sure I could more than begrudgingly grant athletes a qualified status as an artist — as a kind of skilled craftsman, maybe. Musicians are definitely artists, but they are performing artists, interpreting (albeit creatively) the creative work of others. But in the case of both the musician and the athlete, it is their in-person performance which requires all that practice in solitude. (Improvisational music, I would have to ad¬ mit, would be an exception.) So far as I know, though, few peo¬ ple would pay money to watch a writer write (although if I’m mistaken in this belief I hasten to add that I’m more than willing to offer my services cheaply) — so these two particular analogies don’t really hold. The correct analogies would be to composers and painters. In their case the creation itself — rather than practice, as in the case of the performing artist — is what is done in solitude. The end-product, the thing Winter/Spring 1983 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 37 UNCLASSIFIED ADS created (the story or article or book, the work of music or paint¬ ing), is what people pay their money to get — and whether or not they ever see the artist is immaterial to their enjoyment of the art. The fact that musicians and athletes do not seem to me to be analogous to writers does little harm to Grant’s point, since in most cases it just as easily could have been made with "com¬ poser” or "painter” interposed, except where he talks about practice and points out how musicians and athletes must prac¬ tice their skills for hours every day and hints that writers are slack because they may only write for two to four hours per day. This is so in the case of the performing artist since their skills are skills of interpretation— merely hitting the right note does not make a great musician. The writer’s (or painter’s or composer’s) “skill” is not in the same category, does not seek the same results and therefore probably need not be in the same pattern. Eight hours a day at a piano keyboard may not make you a great composer but it would probably make you an accomplished or at least quite impressive musician; similarly, eight hours a day at a typewriter keyboard may not make you a great writer, but you'd probably be a hell of a typist. Jessica Amanda Salmonson I don’t think Rich Brown un- Post Office Box 20610 derstood Budrys at all. It's Seattle, Washington 98102 like Somtow’s view of America in his Thrust inter¬ view. Some people are sitting in shopping malls (or science- fiction conventions) and have mistaken that for heaven. These same people write science fiction. There are other people with a horror of all this stuff and/or a vision or life sitting somewhere else than in science fiction, too, but it isn’t quite as recognizably limited and all-consumingly ridiculous. To Grant Carrington: There are in fact numerous cases of people sitting down to pianos ( children often enough) and figuring out how to play it in minutes. Many famous guitarists and blues musicians, etc., are self-taught; some can’t play worth a damn and some have awful voices but they’ve learned to use this superficial “lack” of ability in finest ways to create some of the best music of this modern age. Basin Street music for instance; Ragtime; even rock and roll. Rock of the late 70s and presently is sometimes so highly skillful and musically trained that it just plain stinks. A punk band with four twelve year old musicians strumming, beating and screaming has more life, beauty, vigor, and art in it. By the same token (and referring to Mike Conner’s article which addresses this issue in part), many of the world's best authors can’t spell and don’t know a dangling participle from a conjugated phrase. It was Twain who said something like, “Anyone who can spell can’t write." Andy Offutt is an excellent speller. I think most an¬ thologists and prozine editors will agree with me on this: sub¬ missions from English departments and profesors are the least likely to be of any interest or value. Stories from almost any other department on a University campus have a much better chance of being worthwhile. Art is not training, I do believe. Ar¬ tistic talent is already there (or not.) Then training is just a mat¬ ter of acquiring more tools to exercise one’s own voice. Anyone can be trained to play a musical instrument; anyone can be trained to write. The art of it is somewhere else, somewhere in¬ side, interacting with environment. [We also heard from: Janrae Frank, Sharon Jarvis, Allen Koszowski, Norman Epstein .] SHEFFIELD (cont.) Sagan has now had practice; a second novel would probably be a great technical improvement over the flawed first effort. The real pity is this: given Carl Sagan’s other com¬ mitments, that second attempt will probably never be made. — Charles Sheffield, May, 1982 Unclassified Advertisements are 15c per word per insertion, minimum 20 words. Quantity discounts are 10% for 3 issues and 20% for 6 issues: 20% discount to booksellers carrying Thrust. Prepaid only. Thrust Publications, 8217 Langport Terrace, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20760. National Fantasy Fan Federation’s 21st Annual SF Amateur Short Story Contest. Send SASE for rules and blanks to Donald Franson, 6543 Babcock Ave., North Hollywood, CA 91606. Men¬ tion Thrust. SPACE AND TIME #62 fiction by Janet Fox, John Alfred Taylor and others. Still available: #61 -Richard Lyon, Ardath Mayhar, more. $4 each; $7 both. SPACE AND TIME c/o Gordon Linzner, 138 W. 70th Street (4-B) New York, NY 10023. Mention THRUST for a bonus back issue! OTHERGATES— The most complete SF/fantasy market guide. Twice yearly, $3/issue, $5/2 issues. OWLFLIGHT— Alternative SF/fantasy magazine. $3/issue, $10/4 issues. Checks to Unique Graphics, 1025 55th St., Oakland, CA 94608 ATTRACTIVE, well-organized 55-page SF catalog: $1 refund¬ able with purchase. Good prices on hardcovers and paper¬ backs. Also, Mack Reynolds & Tom Disch bibliographies, $1 each. CHRIS DRUMM, Box 445, Polk City, Iowa 50226. Wanted: Events, Seminars, Tournaments, Judges for Fantasy- Lair ‘83 Gaming Convention. FRP, wargaming, SF, computers, costume contest. March 25-27, Tonkawa, Ok. Details: NOD; POB 241; Ponca City, Ok; 74602. (405) 762-0349. SF-Fantasy Magazines, Books. Send $1.00 for 64-page catalog. Collections also purchased (large or small). Robert A. Madle, 4406 Bestor Dr., Rockville, MD. 20853 Virginia’s Largest Selection of new/used SF, fantasy, comics. Open seven days a week. Want lists accepted w/SASE. Hole in the Wall Books, 905 W. Broad St., Falls Church, VA. 22046 (703) 536-2511. Buy, sell, or trading SF & fantasy pulps, digests, hardbounds, paperbacks, complete sets of many mags and pulps, send 2 stamps for catalog— Graham Holroyd, 20 Old Farm Circle, Pitt- sford, NY 14534 Fantasy Archives, SF & Fantasy Literature of the 19th and 20th Centuries. We specialize in the uncommon. Search service, comprehensive catalogs available, inquire. We pay highest prices for Fine 1st Editions, Original art, Mss., ALS, TLS, Galleys, Fanzines, Pulps. 71 Eighth Ave., N.Y., NY, 10014. (212) 929-5391. Chapdelaine, Perry A.; The Laughing Terran; he; $7.50; signed, number $12.50. Spork of the Ayor; he; $7.50; signed, numbered $12.50. Goldin,* Stephen,- Assault on the Gods; he; signed, numbered $9.95. Holly, Joan Hunter; Keeper; pb; signed, numbered; $1.95. Leguin, Ursula K.; Orsinian Tales; he; $7.95; Rocannon's World; $6.95; Reamy.Tom,- Blind Voices; he; $8.95. van Vogt, A.E,- Battle of Forever; he; $9.95; signed, numbered $14.95. Please keep watching for those John W. Campbell Letters! AC Publishing Co., Rt. 4, Box 137, Franklin, Tennessee, 37064 Phone (615) 646-3757 Thrust— Science Fiction in Review Page 38 Winter/Spring 1983 THE LITERATURE OF IDEAS Poul Anderson Alan Dean Foster Debbie Notkin Jack Wodhams Charles Sheffield Marcia Martin Karl Hansen Richard Lupoff Dr. Dean R. Lambe RIGEL #6 on sale in December A four issue (one year) subscription to RIGEL is $8.00 ($11.00 outside the US). Single copies are $3.00 ($3.50 outside the US). Please send checks or money orders to: Aesir Press, Box 2523, Richmond, CA 94802. Issue 5 (Spring 1974): Fred Pohl, Roger Zelazny, Lampton, Bischoff. Issue 8 (Spring 1977): Ted White, Bischoff, Lampton, Stef fan, Bailey. Issue 9 (Fall 1977): Norman Spinrad, White, Lampton, Sheffield, Bischoff, Steffan. SCIENCE FICTION ,N REVIEW Thrust— Science Fiction in Review is the highly acclaimed, Hugo Award nominated magazine about science fiction and fantasy. Since 1972, Thrust has been featuring in-depth interviews with science fiction’s best known authors and artists, articles and columns by the field’s most outspoken writers, and reviews of current SF books. Thrust has built its reputation on never failing to take a close look at the most sensitive and controversial issues concerning SF, and continues to receive the highest praise and most heated comments from professionals and fans in the SF field. If you’ve never read Thrust— Science Fiction in Review, isn’t it about time you found out what everyone’s talking about? BACK ISSUES* Issue 10 (Spring 1978): Isaac Asimov, Kirby McCauley, Sheffield, White, Bischoff, Stathis. Issue 11 (Fall 1978): Ted Sturgeon, Joe Haldeman, C.J. Cherryh, White, Sheffield, Bischoff, Shirley, Stathis. 12 (Summer 1979): Fred Saberhagen, Octavia Butler, White, Sheffield, Bischoff, Shirley, Salmonson, Lampton, Steffan. Issue 13 (Fall 1979): Marion Z. Bradley, David Gerrold, Bishop, Sheffield, Shirley, Steffan. Issue 14 (Winter 1980): Barry Malzberg, J.G. Ballard, Bishop, Sheffield, White, Bischoff, Shirley. Issue 15 (Smmer 1980): Gardner Dozois, Freas, Effinger, Bishop, White, Sheffield, Steffan. Issue 16 (Fall 1980): Joan Vinge, Bishop, White, Bischoff, Shirley, McGarry, Salmonson. Issue 17 (Summer 1981): Ray Gallun, Sheffield, Stathis, Bishop, Effinger. Issue 18 (Winter 1982): Greg Benford, Somtow Sucharitkul, D.G. Compton, Sheffield, Brown, Conner, Carrington. Issue 19 (Winter 1983): Gardner Dozois, Tom Disch, Gene Wolfe, Sheffield, Effinger. □ A six issue (2 year) subscription ($9.00 U.S. & Canada; $11.00 foreign) starting with issue # _ . (Note: add 50<l to start with current issue; other¬ wise subscription starts with next issue available.) □ Back issues: C5D8D9niOD11 □ 12 □ 13 □ 14 □ 15 □ 16 □ 17 DI8 ($1.95 each U.S. & Canada, $2.25 each elsewhere). Name: _ THRUST PUBLICATIONS 8217 Langport Terrace, Gaithersburg, Maryland 20877 