 “The best idea in [A Walking Tour of the Shambles] we stole, happily, from what may be the only place it’s ever been done (which is Charles G. Finney’s The Circus of Dr. Lao): the list of unanswered questions. He has a list of the questions which were not answeredin the book. We actually went one step further, because we provide not only a list of unanswered questions but a list of answers, which Genedid.It’s absolutely marvelous and rather creepy. The acid bath one always gets a horrified laugh at readings: ‘What kind of man would kill a woman anddis- solve her body in acid, and how could that safely be done today?’”’ NEIL GAIMAN Gene [Rodman] Wolfe was born May 7, Award, and is a finalist on the Hugo ballot. His have an audience. With most writing, you have 1931 in Brooklyn, New York and grew up in current children’s book Coraline (2002) is a an audiencebutit’s imaginary — somebodyjust Texas, where he graduated from the University bestseller. Other works include Don’t Panic: like you wholikes the same kinds of things and of Houston in 1956 with a BS in mechanical The Official Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy likes your jokes, but isn’t you and is as smart or engineering. He served in the US Army in Korea Companion (1988), collection Smoke and smarter, and you’re writing for him or her. The from 1952-1954, was a project engineer for Mirrors (1998), and graphic children’s book joy of our project was, I had my audience. I was Procter and Gamble from 1956-72, and senior The Day I Swapped My Dad for Two Goldfish writing for Gene. If it made Gene laugh, it editor ofPlant Engineering from 1972 - 84, when (1997, with Dave McKean). Gaiman currently worked. And Gene had an audience, too. he left to write full time. His first published story lives in Minneapolis, Minnesota with his wife, “The best idea in there westole, happily, was “The Dead Man” (1965) for erotic maga- Mary McGrath, whom he married in 1985, their from what maybethe only place it’s ever been zine Sir. Most ofhis early SF work appeared in son and two daughters. done (which is Charles G. Finney’s The Circus Damon Knight's Orbit series; manycollections Wolfe and Gaimanfirst met in 1983, at the of Dr. Lao): the list of unanswered questions. of his stories have been published over the British Fantasy Convention in Birmingham. He has a list of the questions which were not years. They and their families became friends when answered in the book. Weactually wentone step Wolfe’s novels began to appear in 1970, Gaimanandhis family movedto the US in 1992. further, because we provide not only list of with Operation ARES, and include The Fifth They recently collaborated on A Walking Tour unanswered questions but a list of answers, Head of Cerberus (1972), Peace (1975), of the Shambles: Little Walks for Sightseers which Genedid. It’s absolutely marvelous and “Latro” books Soldier of the Mist (1986) and #16, published for the 2002 World Horror rather creepy. The acid bath one always gets a Soldier ofArete (1989), and Castleview (1990); Convention where they were both guests. horrified laugh at readings: ‘What kind of man he has also written books for young adults and The “interview” is a series of talks with would kill a woman and dissolve her body in poetry. His most ambitious and acclaimed works Gaiman interviewing Wolfe, overseen by acid, and how could that safely be done today?’ are the 12 books and various stories that share Charles N. Brown and Jennifer A. Hall. “The strangest thing is this Gahan Wilson the same “Urth” universe: the “Book of the New cover with a picture of me and Gene on it. How Sun” sequence (four books 1980 - 83, with a NG: “The project we just did together was cool is that?” fifth added in 1987, plus several related stories), a lovely bit of fun.” GW:“The really cool thing there is, we’re the “Book of the Long Sun” (four books 1993— GW:“J certainly enjoyed it. There’s two in association with Alice in Wonderland, which 96), and its sequel trilogy “Book of the Short versions printed out — one Neil gets top billing, is where I have always wanted to be! I’ve always Sun” (1999-2001). “New Sun” volume one, The and one / get top billing.” wanted this little upper-class English girl to Shadow of the Torturer (1980), won a World NG: “The fun of it for me was theinitial come up to me, holding a piece of cake in each Fantasy Award; volume two, The Claw of the problem-solving conversations. I phoned Gene hand, and say ‘Which one should I eat?’” Conciliator (1981), a Nebula; and volume four, up andsaid, ‘We’ve beenasked to collaborate on NG: “Gene and I resort to e-mail when we The Citadel of the Autarch (1983), the John W. a story.’ He laughed hollowly. I said, ‘The only have to, if I’m on a different continent, but most Campbell Memorial Award. Wolfe’s other wayI think we could doit is if we pick some of the time when we’re doing a story the fun of awardsinclude a Nebula for novella “The Death kind of thing that will allow us to do what you it is posting it to each other, then phoning up and of Doctor Island” (1973), a World Fantasy did in Bibliomen, where wehaveshorter things laughing at each others’ jokes. We wouldn’t Awardfor collection Storeys from the Old Hotel that make up something bigger. We could do a have been able to do that with e-mail. It would (1988), and a World Fantasy Life Achievement tarot deck, a dictionary, a guidebook.’ And Gene have been moreefficient, but muchless fun.” Award in 1996. He has been to married said, ‘Let’s do a guidebook.’ He could have said GW:“I’m not sure it would have been more Rosemary Frances Dietsch since 1956; they yes to a dictionary, and it could have beenjustas efficient. I’m not nearly as good a writer at e- have two sons and two daughters, and live in strange and dangerous.” mail as I am on paper. I’m an old-fashioned guy. Barrington, Illinois. GW:“Butthat, to my knowledge, has been I need time to print it out and look at it and Neil [Richard] Gaiman was born done more. AmbroseBierce wasthe original guy revise, scratch my head, pencil out words and November 10, 1960 in Porchester, England. in that area, and it’s been done by a numberof pencil in words. The computer drives menuts. I After attending school in southern England, he other people. It’s very tempting to define terms, always remind people whotalk about how writ- moved to London, where he worked as a free- put your own prejudices in as Samuel Johnson ing is going to be revolutionized by the comput- lance journalist in the early 1980s and sold his did. But I didn’t know of anybody who had done er that Shakespeare wrote with a feather that he first stories to gaming and men’s magazinesin a guidebook, other than The Tough Guide to had to resharpen every pageor so, and look what 1984 and 1985. His first work in the field was Fantasy by Diana Wynne Jones (which really he did!” co-editing humorous book of SF quotations liked).” NG: “And you, you started writing in col- Ghastly Beyond Belief (1985, with Kim NG: “I think what attracted both Gene and lege?” Newman). His well-known “Sandman’”’ me to it was the incredibly dry tone. Anybody GW:“I started writing at Texas A&M,for comic/graphic series began in 1989, and who’s ever done any touristing anywhere has The Commentator, which wasthe literary maga- includes “A Midsummer Night’s Dream (1990), ended up with one of these little guidebooks: zine. I wrote three or fourlittle stories for it. I the only comic to win a World Fantasy Award. ‘You are now looking at this example of 1870s wish to God I could remember the nameof the His novels include Good Omens (1990, with whatever, and this happened here. Nowcross the editor, because I learned more from the student Terry Pratchett); Neverwhere (1996), a novel- road and you will see....’ It seemed one of those editor of The Commentator than I have ever ization of his dark-fantasy BBC series; Stardust things where you could take the style and then learned from any othereditor. (1998); and American Gods (2001), which won insert your own contents. “He was an upperclassman and I was a an International Horror Guild award, a Locus ‘For any collaborative work, suddenly you sophomore, and I expected to be beaten. We Continued on page 81 LOCUS September 2002 / 7 Ron Walotsky’s death was and wasn’t a surprise: we knew he’d been hospitalized in June and had been Editorial Matters two-page mimeographedissue in 1968. I don’t feel a day older. Actually, yes I do — a lot older, almost following his progress almost daily through e-mails; trum Board. ancient. I keep looking back at the staff photos and and though his condition was very serious, we had E-MAIL PROBLEMS wondering where the time has gone. Jenni collected | expected him to pull through. So to suddenly hear he Unknownto us, our ISP placed a spam filter on many of the pieces in the Locus 500 section without hadn’t made it was a sad shock. I’d seen Ron at our e-mail that prevented quite a bit of legitimate e- showing them to me until this month. I’m suitably Worldcon and World Fantasy Conlast year, and spent mail from getting through to us since June, including impressed and wish I really was the person they think most of I-Con with him in April. We talked mostly subscription, CD-ROM,and back-issue orders. We I am. Now Id better stop before I get maudlin. about growing up in the lower-middle-class neigh- have recovered the missing mail and are in the pro- Wehavea bit less news this month because of an borhoods of Brooklyn in the ’40s, and being Jewish. cess of going throughit and straightening thingsout. earlier editorial deadline to get in the extra color and I was five years older (he told me he was born in THIS ISSUE have the issue printed in time for Worldcon.It’s also 1942, but then artists don’t have to be exact), but we This is Issue 500, and ourfirst with expandedfull- the summer doldrums. Wealso had to hold conven- shared similar experiences. Ron wasone of the warm- color coverage, which weplan to continue regularly. tions to have room for Ron’s art and obituary. The | est and friendliest people I knew.In the early ’90s, Arnie Fenner did the cover and the color spreads of updated convention listing is posted at Locus Online. | we ended up talking about masks and I told him I Ron Walotsky’s work and the two interviews. Melinda The cover price is now $5.95. We’ll be raising sub- had a collection at home. Hetried to sell me one of (Mandy) Himel became our in-house color expert, scription rates in the next month orso, so please re- his crab warrior masks, but when I told him I couldn’t doing the table of contents, People & Publishing, new (or subscribe) now. really afford it he insisted I take it for free, “‘so I’ll be news, and other pages. Other changesinclude a rede- NEXT ISSUE part of your collection.” I ended up trading him a signed table of contents, courtesy of Arnie. We’ll be October will have the Hugo and Chesley Awards lifetime Locus subscription even though he said he making other changes in the coming months, most winners, the Hubbard Awards, and interviews with wanted nothing in return. I’ll miss him. likely beginning with the bestseller pages next issue. Dan Simmonsand probably Jeff VanderMeer. There On a happier note, we had dinner with China Jenni has been interviewing mesince the begin- will be Hugo Voting Figures, photos of the awards Miéville while he was on tour in the Bay Area in ning of the year. What appearshere is a small portion ceremony, and thefirst installment of our Worldcon July, and showedhim the Locusoffices. A very charm- of what she’s got. We hopeit serves to give readers report. There will also be our usual assortmentof re- ing and well-read guy, he was suitably impressed by an overview of the roots of Locus and some back- views, news, people notes, etc. my collection. We had dinner at the Claremont Ho- ground ofits illustrious founder. It seems almost in- Since Worldconis practically in our back yard, the tel, and I was able to regale him with stories of Ber- conceivable that 34 years have passedsince that first entire in-house staff will be there as well as Mark R. keley in 1968, when the Worldcon banquet was held Kelly from Los Angeles and Jonathan Strahan from in the very room we werein. Wealso had dinner with Perth, Australia. We’ll have a Locus table. Look for Eileen Gunn and John Berry, who have been living us there! —C.N. BrownlJ.A. Hall in San Francisco for several years and will be return- ing to live in the Seattle area in October. Eileen runs The Infinite Matrix, and we learned a lot about the USA CANADA & MEXICO INTERNATIONAL problemsofInternet publishing. John Berry still looks ___$29.00 for 6 issues (Periodical) ___$32.00 for 6 issues (Periodical) ___$32.00 for 6 issues (Sea Mail) ___$49.00 for 12 issues (Periodical) ___$52.00 for 12 issues (Periodical) ___$52.00 for 12 issues (Sea Mail) too young to have been on the original Locus sub- ____$90.00 for 24 issues (Periodical) ___$95.00 for 24 issues (Periodical) ___$95.00 for 24 issues (Sea Mail) scription list for 1968. We talked about recent trips ___$58.00 for 12 issues (1st class) ___$58.00 for 12 issues (1st class) ___$85.00 for 12 issues (Air Mail) to Russia and othertravels abroad, and how eachtrip ___$105.00 for 24 issues (1st class) ___$105.00 for 24 issues (1st class) ___$140.00 for 24 issues (Air Mail) gives us new perspective on our own country. All subscriptions are payable in US funds. Canadians, please use bank or postal money orders, not personal checks. Subscribeto: Tim Pratt has survived this place a year and is now Locus Publications, P.O. Box 13305, Oakland CA 94661 orcall (510) 339-9198; or fax (510) 339-8144; or email <locus@locus an assistant editor. Congratulations! mag.com>; or online at <www.locusmag.com>. Single copy price $5.95 + $2.00 s&h. Institutional : $3.00 extra per year. CORRECTIONS me In last month’s introduction to Kinuko Y. Craft’s interview, we incorrectly linked ASFA to the Spec- Name: Address: Enclosed is: $ Card Number: [] New [] Renewal ao) trum Awards. While Spectrum at one time included City: State: Credit Card Type: Exp. Date: ASFAlistings, the two are and always have been com- Zip: Country: Email: pletely separate entities. The Spectrum AwardsCraft has received were presented by the jury of the Spec- Phone: Cardholder’s Signature The Wolfe & Gaiman Show thought, ‘Well, I wrote those stories for The Com- der the bridge, and he boughtit. For years after that, Continued from page 7 mentator. | could write murder mysteries.’ Wrong, the Orbit series was my main market. Myothersales but I thought it and I started writing. were stories that Damon Knight had turned down.” were beaten all the time at Texas A&M.You had to “IT wrote a full-length murder mystery which no- NG: “The first novel was Operation Ares, and take it — bend down, and they whaled away at you body would buy, for really good reasons. I wrote a the next thing weget, if memory serves, is The Fifth with a big wooden paddle. This happened with alarm- numberofstories. And I finally made myfirst sale to Head of Cerberus.” ing frequency, and you never got time to heal. What a skin magazinecalled Sir in 1965. I wrote ‘The Dead GW: “That was sometime after. I had written a he did was worse. He got mystory and he got a blue Man’, this little ghost story involving a crocodile. I numberof Orbit stories. I wrote one called ‘The Fifth pencil, and he edited it there in front of me. As I was had read anarticle in Readers’ Digest about croco- Head of Cerberus’, which was wonderful. I sent it to standing there, with the drops of blood coursing down diles, and I put it together with stuff I had taken from Damon Knight. Every year he would have the Milford my face, I said to myself, ‘I see what he’s doing. He’s Kipling, because I had read a lot of Kipling that was Writers’ Conference, which was only for published taking out every word the sentence doesn’t require. laid in India. I sent it to probably a couple of dozen writers — either people he was publishing in Orbit or I’m going to write the next story so he can’t do that.’ markets (because Sir would have been a bottom mar- people he would /ike to publish in Orbit. And I tried to doit. I didn’t succeed, but he wascross- ket), and Sir bought it for $60. “Damonlived in this old Charles Addams house, ing out less in that secondstory. If it wasn’t for that, “Of course I had other stories. I had one called The Anchorage. If you have seen the cartoons, you I would probably be a bitter old retired engineer, “The Mountains Are Mice’. I sent it to Galaxy and know exactly what this house was: a haunted Victo- whereas now I’m bitter old still-active writer. got it back with a form rejection (which is what hap- rian monstrosity with a whopping front porch that “T was a college dropout — before it was fashion- pened with everything I sent). Fred Pohl was editor went around three sides of the thing. able. I lost my student deferment and I was drafted then. I was working from an alphabetical list of sci- “I brought ‘The Fifth Head of Cerberus’ to the into the United States Army. ence fiction markets. The next magazine on it was/f. workshop, and while I was there, an editor from “T had just got home from the service, and Rose- Little did I know that /f was also edited by Fred Pohl. Scribners came up to me andsaid, ‘You know,if you mary cameto visit our family in Houston from far off I wrote another cover letter and I put it in a fresh would write two more novellas like this, we would Peoria, Illinois. We had lived next door when we were envelope andI sent it to the editor at Jf. I got back a publish it as a book.’ So I did. That was myfirst hard- like three, and our mothers had stayed in touchall letter from Fred Pohl that said, ‘You know,I think cover, and that wasthe first good book I had.”’ this time. Of course I was required to date her and the rewrite has really improved this. I’m glad youlet NG: “You did a lot more than add two novellas. take her out places. We got married in 1956. We didn’t me see it again. If you’ll take 2¢ a word, I will buy Those three stories interweave, reflect, commenton, have any money, and we were living in a ‘pointed it.” am God’s own fool, but I’m not such a fool that illuminate, confuse, and do all manner of things to apartment,’ whichis refinishedattic. You could only I said, ‘No, I want to retain translation rights.’ That each other.” walk down the middle. One room was kitchen and was mysecondsale. GW: “Yes. A lot of readers consider it a sort of dining room; the other was everything else. Rose- “That got me into Worlds of If, and Worlds of If three-part novel. The second novella is a story told mary was a secretary and I was a cub engineer, just got me an invitation from Lloyd Biggle, Jr. to join by one of the characters in the third novella, and so starting. (I had gone back to Houston and got a SFWA.In some SFWApublication, I saw that Damon on. There’s lots of ugly stuff about being buriedalive, BSME.) I saw a news story that said Gold Medal Knight was editing an original anthology called Or- because I tend to be claustrophobic. I used to have Books wanted murder mysteries and would pay a bit and waslookingforstories. I sent him ‘Trip-Trap’, these horrible ‘buried alive’ dreams, which alternated minimum of $2,000 for any book they accepted. I a riff on the Billy-goat Gruff thing with the troll un- with my “being condemned to Hell’ dreams, so a lot LOCUS September 2002 / 81 The Wolfe & Gaiman Show Book of the New Sun’ plus ‘The Book of the Long ing to people is ‘Your life could be much worse. You Sun’ plus the new three now hadto be seen as a com- could be like these lead characters but you’re not.’ of that tended to show up in myfiction. Have you plete sequence, which I’m not quite sure about. Yes, So that’s hope too.” evertried to do a story based on a dream? I’ve done a it’s set in the same integral universe, but it doesn’t NG: “‘The various things SF can be include being couple of them that worked, but mostly I can’t. “To give that feeling of movement you get from the be- predictive, but it can also be cautionary. Much of the the Dark Tower Came’ wasa nightmare story about a ginning of “The Book of the Long Sun’ all the way bleakest fiction is cautionary — ‘Don’t go there.’” towerthat stretches between the Earth and the moon through the next seven books, or whatever. GW:“In A Christmas Carol, Marley’s ghost ap- and is anchored at both ends. (It’s an engineering ‘When I was reading ‘The Book of the Long Sun’, pears. He’s in Scrooge’s bedroom but he’s also in impossibility, but in a fantasy story you can doit.) there was a definite feeling of Kipling, and also ech- Hell even while he’s in Scrooge’s bedroom. And what The other, ‘Kevin Mallone’, is about a household that oes of Chesterton’s very first ‘Father Brown’ stories. he is telling Scrooge is “There’s still hope for you. advertises for a ‘well-bred but impecunious young Stuff that you read when young mulches downin the There’s no longer hope for me. Mylife is over. I blew couple’ who will live in the house and be the master back of your head,andit’s there as a tool to draw on.” it. You, Ebenezer, formerly my partner, couldstill and mistress. The thing is, the gardener is possessed GW: ‘‘Absolutely.”’ pull yourself out.’ That’s hope.” (or may be) by the ghost of a former servant in the NG: “‘When you were doing the ‘Long Sun’ and NG:“Of course what Scrooge windsup getting is house.”’ ‘Short Sun’ sequences, were there places where you visions of past, present, and future, and the future he NG: ‘‘You wrote while doing a real job for 28 years. were definitely conscious of doing that, or wasit just gets is blacker than anything Barry Malzberg ever How did you do it? What was your schedule?”’ where the story went that day?”’ came up with.” GW:“I experimented, as I think anybody would. GW:“There were things I was conscious of, and GW:“You don’t give hope the way you give rai- For 17 years I worked as a mechanical engineer. Af- there were things I was not consciousof. It depends sins by putting raisins in raisin bread. You give hope ter The Fifth Head of Cerberus had been published, on what things we’re talking about. Were mylater the way you give bread when you bakebread.It’s all I woke up one morning and Rosemary wascrying in discoveries interesting enough to talk about? No.” hope. I’m quite conscious of doing that. The basic bed. She was homesick. So I went in to work that day NG: “‘Is feedback important to you? I thought the hopeis the hope that things can be different. I’ve been and one of the guys in the office had left his Wall Washington Post article made some very sensible in some godawful situations, and I think people in Street Journal on his desk. I picked it up and paged points. It said, ‘This is how good Gene Wolfe is, and those situations despair because they come to believe through it, and there was an ad for technical editors. this is why you haven’t heard of him.’ One point was change is impossible. Both science fiction and fan- I said to myself, ‘If this job is in Illinois, I’m going to that you make noeffort in your fiction to be user- tasy can be literatures of hope. We’re saying the world apply for it.’ And by golly, it was in Illinois, so I friendly.” doesn’t haveto be like this, and yourlife doesn’t have applied and interviewed for the job. They gave me GW: ‘‘What would I do that I don’t do, if I were to be like this. When you know enoughabouthistory this form to fill out and it said, ‘How much money do being user-friendly?”’ and you know enough about prehistory, you realize you want?’ I thought to myself, ‘I will ask for so much NG:“It goes back to that line I’ve been using ever there are times whenit was very different. There were money, if they give it to me there’s no question I am times when Earth’s climate was far warmerthanit is going to quit my job andtakethis oneflat out.’ They today, and times whenit was far colder than it is to- ended up giving me a thousand dollars a year more day. It’s not like we’re veering off the map with glo- than I had asked for. We sold the house in Ohio and I NG: “What’s the most important bal warming.” NG: “‘It’s easy to talk about what we’re trying to became a staff member on Plant Engineer. ‘““What I did mostly was get up early in the morn- thing aboutfiction?” give readers, but what do you take from it as an au- ing and write for one to two hours. One of the good GW: “The most important thing thor? One of the hardest things of yours I ever read — things about working for this magazine was that in in terms of actually feeling the effort involved spiri- ten minutes I could get from my front door to my is that it assures the reader that tually and emotionally, in terms of just the work and desk, which gave me more writing time. I often wake up during the night, and I had rule that if it was things need not be as they are how you doit — wasin Castle of Days, I think, where youprinted a prayer you’d written for writing, which after 4 a.m. I got up for the day, and I would write now.In other words, the most im- I assume was a prayer you said before going off to until Rosemary had breakfast ready. Then of courseI work.It had that sort of ‘four o’clock in the morning’ wrote on Saturdays and Sundays as everybody does, portant thing is hope.” quality. What do you take from writing? What does and the holidays.” it give you?” NG: ‘‘Was there a big change when youretired GW:“Enormoussatisfaction. When I think that I and becamea full-time writer?” since I read it in a letter where you defined goodlit- have done what I have done the way it ought to be GW:“Yes and no. I had written on vacation, and erature: ‘Mydefinition of goodliterature is that which done, and that I have really created something that this was like I was on vacationall the time. All I had can be read by an educated reader, and reread with needed to be created and would not have been with- to do was write. It was really neat. This was cruel of increased pleasure.’ While ‘user-friendly’ may have out me, obviously writing is a dream job. Umpty- me, but I would set the clock radio to a station that been the wrong word, there is a level on which lot ump people would love to be writers and they can’t gave traffic reports for commuters. They would be of fiction these days is expected to give everything do it. I can do it. You can do it. We’re blessed.” saying, ‘Oh, the Kennedy is wall-to-wall today. It’s up first time to somebody, whether he knows some- NG: ‘‘Not only can youlie in fiction, but I think an hour and a half from over here to the Loop,’ and I thing about the subject or not. You do notdo that.” Gene is the master of lying in fiction, both directly would get up and yawnandstretch andsay, ‘I don’t GW:“Phooey! I don’t want to write that kind of and indirectly. Peace is built on lies. And I assume have to be downthere.’ So I’d brush myteeth,start thing. Rats! I don’t like it and it would bore me to that, being who heis, Gene is pretty damn sure what the coffee, and go over to the desk and write.” write it and I’m not gonna write it. And besides, I the truth and whatthelies are in Peace. Therest of us NG:‘How different is the person who writes the don’t know everything fo give it up. You’re going to have to get through that as best we can. After three or stories from the person that everybody gets to meet, see things in there that I don’t see consciously.I like four times through that text, you begin to be able to encounter, look up at on the platform today?”’ those things.” say, ‘I think he’s lying aboutthis or that.’”’ GW:“I drink blood. Other than that disgusting NG: ‘“‘I take enormous pleasure in the fact that GW: “T never lie.” proclivity, I’m aboutlike this. The difference was people are still arguing about the first four in the NG: ‘‘Gene, you create the trickiest characters! when I was working as an engineer. I learned that I ‘Book of the New Sun’ sequence to this day. ‘Was Like in ‘The Walking Sticks’. You not only get to do had to be very different as an engineer than from be- the Autarch Severian’s mother?’ ‘Is the Clute theory a wonderful Jeckyll and Hyde riff, but it gives us a ing a sciencefiction writer. I had to be very staid and valid?’ ‘Oh, we’ve got another Australian theory...’ narrator whose unreliability cheerfully lies to us all conventional, the white shirt and the necktie andall You have these dueling theorists, pointing to the text the way through the story. And we know he’s prob- this stuff. I had breakaway neckties with clips in them, and trying to second- and third- and outguess.”’ ably lying. That’s part of the joy of the story.” because if you wore a conventional necktie andit got GW:“Yeah, but the thing is, too often people want GW:‘Well, if he wasn’t lying he wouldn’t be the caught in the machinery, you were dead. With a meto go in andsettle their argument. That’s exactly guy in this story! He is a type of man that I have met breakawaytie, you wouldn’t get pulled into the gears what I should not do. I am dealing from this position working in industry ten thousand times. He is not and have your head and neck turned into hamburger.” of presumed expertise. We don’t have a level playing going to tell you intentionally anything that is to his NG: “How did you feel when The Washington Post field. If Arthur Conan Doyle had gonein andsettled own detriment.” basically said “The Book of the New Sun’ is your all this ‘Holmes’ stuff, there would be no BakerStreet NG: “‘And we figure out where the story is hap- masterwork?” Irregulars today, yet people have made whole hob- pening sometimes from the places where he contra- GW:“Well, I know that’s what everybody thinks. bies out of being Baker Street Irregulars — why dicts himself or he has to tell you a little bit more I keep trying to write something better than that. I shouldn’t they? There’s no sacredness to the text.” than he would have liked. You have a narrator who’s may never succeed, but you try and top yourself, NG: “What’s the most important thing aboutfic- lying, but the authorisn’t.” . right? I would like to write something my readers tion?”’ GW: ‘‘Remember, I was a journalist on an indus- think is better, but I haven’t donethat. I’ve done things GW:“The most important thing is that it assures trial magazine, Plant Engineering. I’ve been in a ton that J thought were better. I did meet one guy today the reader that things need not be as they are now. In of industrial plants, in order to talk to ten tons of whosaid Soldier of the Mist is the best thing he had other words, the most important thing is hope. people who worked in them, including some places ever read. That’s very pleasant.” ‘‘Sure I’ve read Barry Malzberg. Barry is very that are right out of Dante and somethat are so nice NG: “‘The Post was very explicitly saying that ‘The black, but it seems to me oneofthe things he is say- you think they must be movie sets, so clean andbright 82 / LOCUS September 2002 “WOLFE Is AS FINE A WRITER AS SCIENCE FICTION HAS PRODUCED.” the New York Tinies Book Review GENE WOLFE Available now in trade paperback, the acclaimed Book of the Short Sun trilogy. me NRCTI iia te os 3 VOLUMEOo THE SECOND SHORT FY" HE HE BOOK OF ON BLUE'S WATERS J AVAILABLE NOW IN TRADE PAPERBACK AVAILABLE NOWIN TRADE PAPERBACK [Wolfe] concludes his alternately a Oo a ? * * dreamy and chilling Bookof the One of the On Blue's Waters is easily Short Sun trilogy [with] the Ssenre’s most the best science fiction novel striking mix of philosophy, humor, BRILLI ANT of the year.... Further evidence that and horrorthatis uniquely t al. t ” Wolfe is the finest living writer Wolfe's stock-in-trade.” — Booklist con oe tors. in his field.” —The Seattle Times —Library Journal THE URTHor THENEWSUN The Wolfe & Gaiman Show is the attraction there?” If somebodystarts absolutely originally, not imitat- GW:“Theattraction in all horror is the same. For ing anyone, he hasto begin by inventing speech. Early and cheerful it’s got to be Doris Day over there run- one thing,it’s survivability. The reader comesto the Lafferty, he was trying to conform,trying to say ‘I ning the milling machine.I wasin a rubbertire plant end and has survived the experience. The reader may, am a writer like other writers.’ Later he decided to that was a vision of Hell.” to some extent, also feel more qualified to deal with abandon the pretense, changing from whatI call NG: “To what extent does that stuff wind up in horror in his or her ownlife. And weall get a certain ‘Lafferty with water’ to ‘Lafferty straight.’ the fiction?”’ dosage of horror in our own lives, unless we have ‘“Myearlier influences include H.G. Wells. He GW:“To whateverextentit intrudes when I’m writ- very brief lives indeed.” snuck completely through my defenses, made mere- ing. You can’t help drawing upon yourself. We take NG: “Despite the fact that I’ve written a novel alize a lot of the things I had been condemning as the facts of our lives and try and transmute them into a that’s been nominated for the Year’s Best Horror old-fashioned 19th-century fiction were really better coherent story. A lot of Peace, is autobiographical. award, I don’t actually think of American Godsas a than mostof the things I was reading then as a kid “I’m working on ‘The Wizard Knight’ now, two horror novel. I don’t think I could do a horror novel. reading pulp magazines. Actually, my favorite pulp big books. The first one, The Knight, is in fourth I know why / couldn’t, but I’m interested to know magazine, Famous Fantastic Mysteries, reprinted draft, and the second, The Wizard, is in first draft, why I can’t see you doing a work ofthat length.” great old stories, but it didn’t emphasize (to me the and it’s going to take a hell of a lot more work.If GW:“I wouldn’t want to live there for two years.” kid reader) what it was doing. I swear there was a you ask me whatI’ll do next, whatis the point of my NG: “‘Is there any possibility of your ever com- period of twoor three years in which I thoughtit was sitting back now and saying, ‘Well, when I finish pleting the Soldier of the Mist sequence, the ‘Latro’ publishing the stories that the other magazines were this, maybe two years from now, what I’ll dois...’ books?”’ too cowardly to put into print, this powerful stuff! I’m going to change my mind a dozen times between GW: “‘That’s a possibility, but I don’t know. An My father was a big H.G. Wells fan, so of course I now andthe time whenI finishit. It’s pointless. idea takes you, or some sort of impulse takes you, would not read H.G. Wells. Then Famous Fantastic ‘““The Wizard Knight’ books are about an Ameri- and that’s how you go. MaybeI will write a baseball Mysteries came out with an entire issue reprinting can kid who is switched by fairies into a different novel. I’ve never written a baseball novel. TheIsland of Doctor Moreau. I, being a dumb kid, universe, a quasi-medieval universe that works on “See this little cane I’m holding? Thisis the Egyp- failed to notice that the author was Wells. It blew me the ‘club sandwich’ principle: there are several lay- tian God of the dead, which I received as a token of away! I guess somewhere in the middle of my sec- ers. He, of course, is in the middle layer. There’s regard from my friend Neil Gaiman. What doesit ond rereading(I readit three times without ever stand- the fairy world below, and up aboveis the realm of mean when yourfriends give you the Egyptian God ing up andstretching), I realized this was by the au- the Norse gods, and so on and so forth. He has vari- of the dead? Last night he did not come alive. Any- thor my father kept trying to get meto read. ous adventures and matures in the course of these, way, I might write a book-length ‘Latro’ horror novel. “T read Lewis Carroll, whoI still think is delightful. and experiences love and sex, and sex andlove. All That’s a real idea, yeah! You know whatthose early In those days, people did notinsist thatlittle boys could that good stuff. Actually, he falls desperately in love Semitic gods were like? Wow. We can do ‘Locked in only read books in which the heroes were otherlittle with the queen of fairies who has switched him, and the Pyramids’... I’ve always wanted to do a book in boys, andlittle girls could only read books in which much of it is his attempt to be united again with which the Sphinx stood up and walked. The ancient the heroes werelittle girls. I read Alice in Wonder- her. She’s going to take this kid and make a hero Egyptians would change the face to be the face of the land and The Wizard of Oz,all this stuff, and I en- out of him.” reigning pharaoh; when they got a new pharaoh,the joyed them because I thought they were goodstories. NG: “‘In some ways, it soundslike the flip side of stonemasons went in and they reshaped the face. ‘“‘Then there was a wholetradition of “bad boy’ Castleview, where we got to see Faerie distantly from Think of the possibilities right there — I think we’re literature — there’s a lot of it in Tom Sawyer. It’s Illinois.”’ cookin’ here, folks!”’ died away because kids today watch TV and play GW: “‘He’sthere. By the end of the book, he knows NG: “I get very frustrated with my fans because computer games, and they don’t do thingslike let the it far better than he knows the America he only they don’t know anything else. I spend a lot of time cat down through the chimneyorsteal pies. Modern vaguely remembers and never knew that well any- trying to say, ‘Look, go and read this, go andreadthat. kids can’t imagine there was a time when mostkids way, because he was immature whenheleft. Sup- Understand where I’m coming from. I didn’t spring went perpetually hungry. They got up hungry and pose you took a boy of 17 and set him downin China from the brow of Jove! This is the Chestertonline,this they went to bed hungry.” for the next 30 years. How much will he know about is the Zelazny line, this is the Lafferty line, this is the NG:“I read some analysis of ‘Hansel and Gretel’ America? Butthis is an unfinished workand I’m still Ellison line. These are the people I came from.” which wasall about its psycho-sexual nature. It ana- tinkering with it.” GW:“I’ve read a lot of Lafferty and I would never lyzed up, down, inside out, and sideways, and I NG: “How about horror? Here youare as a guest deny that I’ve been influenced by Lafferty, any more thought it completely missed the fact that it’s about a at the World Horror Convention, and I don’t recall a than I would deny that I’ve been influenced by family during a famine whodid not have enough food full-length work of horror from you (apart from Chesterton. Youstart writing, imitating someone con- for their two children and themselves and so were Peace, and eventhat is pushing it). But you’ve done sciously or unconsciously. You develop your own going regretfully to dumpthe children.It’s about two short stories. There’s definitely horrorin stories like voice, but I think you always bear some imprint of starving children who descend on this gingerbread ‘The Tree Is My Hat’ or ‘The Walking Sticks’. What the people who impressed you when you were young. house. Thetrail they leave is eaten by starving birds, and they themselves are immediately picked up by a woman as potential food. It’s a story about hunger.” WWW.AMERICAN-FANTASY.COM GW:“Academics can be incredibly obtuse.” | F A WALKING TOUR O Skee NG: “One thing I’ve always wanted to ask you THE SHAMBLES was, how involved were you in the creation of Pringles?”’ GW:“I was the engineer on the original Pringles s Passetoe)ke cooker. Pringles was invented by a German madman. He was making them with a kind of scissor and dip mechanism that wasn’t adaptable to mass production. There was a four-man team,and I did the cookerthat closed around the future potato chips and dragged them through the hot oil and opened them up and dumped them out. The fourth guy, who did the can- ning machine,theyliterally drove crazy with all their nitpicking and pressure to do better.” NG: ‘‘What do you think about the state of your career?”’ GW:“I guess I’m not quite as optimistic now. In 1979, I was workingas a technical editor. I had hopes of becoming rich and famous from myfiction. Those hopes have not eventuated. Neil Gaiman is far more famousthan I am.I suspect he’s also richer.” NG: “I probably am, but that’s mainly just thanks to Hollywood.It’s not a book thing. Movies are where silly moneyis paid, and they do payit to me. But you FANTA are in a very interesting position. If you asked people randomly on the street to name science fiction au- thors, they would probably not name Gene Wolfe, P.O. Box 1059, Woodstock, IL, but if you asked science fiction authors, fantasists, 60098 ¢ garpubserv@aol.com horror writers, at this point they will all list Gene Wolfe. You are the writers’ writer.” CARRIED BY SCIENCE FICTION SPECIA - STORES & MAIL 84 / LOCUS September 2002 