 GENE WOLFE'S TALES OF THE ALIEN AND THE ALIENATED - The Washington Post Sections Home The Washington Post logo Democracy Dies in Darkness Subscribe Username Sign In My Post My Reading List Account Settings Newsletters & alerts Gift subscriptions Contact us Help desk My Post My Reading List Account Settings Newsletters & alerts Gift subscriptions Contact us Help desk Accessibility for screenreader GENE WOLFE'S TALES OF THE ALIEN AND THE ALIENATED Add to list On my list By Michael Dirda Michael Dirda Email Bio April 30, 1989 ENDANGERED SPECIES By Gene Wolfe Tor. 506 pp. $19.95 CALL a writer a magic realist and the Nobel Prize committee will start checking his books out from the Stockholm library; but whisper that the same author produces science fiction or fantasy, and the wide, wide world of Serious Literature will yawn and look the other way. Nevertheless, readers weary of romantic sagas, tacky high-tech thrillers, sensitive portraits of young people at loose ends in a world they never made, etc., etc., might do well to look beyond the gaudy covers and try some sf. Everyone knows about Ursula Le Guin, and maybe J.G. Ballard, but these superior artists are representative rather than exceptional: Read John Crowley, Thomas M. Disch, Joanna Russ, the short stories of Avram Davidson, Theodore Sturgeon, William Tenn and Robert Sheckley. You'll cancel your subscription to the New Yorker and start looking for old issues of the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction. Of all the sf writers now active none is held in higher esteem than Gene Wolfe. The novels in The Book of the New Sun -- the sequence begins with The Shadow of the Torturer -- have won several awards within the field, but they are even better than this. By any standard, Wolfe's beautifully composed, meditative, thrilling, and tricky-beyond-belief "science fantasy" is a work of the highest art: People compare his chronicle of a dying earth and the coming of its redeemer to Tolkien's Ring cycle, but Marguerite Yourcenar's somber and exquisite Memoirs of Hadrian would be nearer the mark. Endangered Species collects much of Wolfe's short fiction of the 1980s, along with too many slight pieces from earlier in his career. Clearly a book that his legion of admirers will want, new readers should nonetheless begin elsewhere. With the exception of "The Detective of Dreams," the powerful, enigmatic "Silhouettes," and one or two other pieces, nothing here rivals the dazzling and deeply disorienting work in The Island of Dr. Death and Other Stories and Other Stories. Once you've devoured that oddly titled collection with pleasure, then by all means go on to Endangered Species. I say with pleasure, because a number of people don't care for Wolfe's rarefied ways: His is an art of indirection, a matter of tangents, silences and obliquities; nothing is said straightforwardly and not only do you need to read closely but often you need to read between the lines. A lot of stories begin in medias res, which can be confusing; but it is one of Wolfe's artistic aims to make the reader work to figure out just what is really going on in a narrative. (A writer, he once remarked, is obliged to be interesting but he doesn't have to be easy.) Like a French new novelist, he gives you the names of things, but not what they are; he tells you what a character does, but not what that action means. The result is fiction as dense as a neutron star -- and just as powerful. Though love's old sweet song is Wolfe's main theme, including spiritual and familial versions along with the erotic, the most salient stylistic aspect of Endangered Species is the fondness for pastiche. "The Detective of Dreams" parodies Poe's puzzles featuring C. Auguste Dupin; but Wolfe turns the tale -- a kind of Chestertonian search for God -- into a theological Mystery as well as a whodunit. "The Rose and the Nightingale" is an Arabian Nights-style entertainment; "A Cabin on the Coast" recalls the Celtic legends about people who travel to fairy land and then return to find that a lot more time has passed than they thought; "Our Neighbor by David Copperfield" is a Dickensian story, complete with an all-stops-out sentimental ending; "In the House of Gingerbread" rewrites, with chilling twists, the story of Hansel and Gretel. THE PLAYING with old forms characterizes literary sophistication; but also carries a sense of the played out. With nothing new to say, we make our nothings new. Always readable and enjoyable (even at their most complex), Wolfe's stories nonetheless seem hobbled with the weight of literary and science fiction tradition. As I read "The HORARS of War" I kept feeling the spectre of Philip K. Dick hovering near, for that war story works best as a variation on one of Dick's favorite themes: How do we know the real man from the robot? "When I Was Ming the Merciless" struck me as a Cute Idea piece, an extrapolation from all those experiments with students in which they learned Obedience to Authority and gleefully went about torturing their comrades. "The Map" and, especially, "The Cat" are neat and even haunting, but you do need to know something of the world of the New Sun to feel their full impact. In short, all but a few of these three dozen stories seem too much like contraptions put together on demand by a craftsman who works easily and well. I enjoyed every page of Endangered Species, but was rarely swept away by either the storytelling or the artistic legerdemain -- and at his best Wolfe is a master of both. So far that best is still in his early novellas and the five-part Book of the New Sun. :: Michael Dirda is a writer and editor for Book World. Michael Dirda Michael Dirda is a Pulitzer Prize-winning columnist for The Washington Post Book World and the author of the memoir “An Open Book” and of four collections of essays: “Readings,” “Bound to Please,” “Book by Book” and “Classics for Pleasure.” Subscriber sign in We noticed you’re blocking ads! Keep supporting great journalism by turning off your ad blocker. Or purchase a subscription for unlimited access to real news you can count on. Try 1 month for $1 Unblock ads Questions about why you are seeing this? Contact us 