 New works of fantasy by Kij Johnson, Gene Wolfe and Terry Pratchett - The Washington Post Accessibility statement Skip to main content Democracy Dies in Darkness Democracy Dies in Darkness Books Book Reviews Fiction Nonfiction Summer reading Books Book Reviews Fiction Nonfiction Summer reading Three new ways to cherish Kij Johnson, Gene Wolfe and Terry Pratchett Recent short story collections from a trio of fantasy-fiction masters remind us why they are beloved November 22, 2023 More than 1 year ago 7 min Review by Michael Dirda In many ways, modern fantasy, which includes science fiction, draws much of its energy from the past, either rewriting, refuting or extending earlier works. For example, some writers deliberately conform to a tradition. Take “Lord of a Shattered Land” and “The City of Marble and Blood,” the latest heroic fantasies by Howard Andrew Jones, which inevitably play against our memory of Robert E. Howard’s Conan the Cimmerian: If you enjoyed reading about the indomitable barbarian, you will enjoy reading about Jones’s Hanuvar. Other writers, however, adopt classic plots and patterns only to subvert them. Consider three recent short-story collections: Kij Johnson’s “ The Privilege of the Happy Ending ,” Gene Wolfe’s “ The Wolfe at the Door ” and Terry Pratchett’s “ A Stroke of the Pen: The Lost Stories .” Johnson’s short fiction can be divided into two sorts. Her more experimental pieces, such as “Tool-Using Mimics,” based on a doctored photograph showing a little girl with octopus tentacles, resemble intellectual exercises, clever and imaginative but not deeply engaging. However, three long stories are wonderful works of pastiche and homage. In “The Privilege of the Happy Ending,” the 6-year-old Ada, an orphan, finds her medieval world devastated by hordes of loping, ravenous monsters called “wastoures,” which devour every living thing in their path. Fortunately, Ada loves and protects an elderly hen named Blanche, who turns out to be shrewd, capable of speech and gifted with exceptional mental powers. Will the two manage to survive? Advertisement Throughout, Johnson employs the naive, matter-of-fact style of a fairy tale but periodically interrupts the narration with questions and comments addressed to her reader. These interjections add a “Choose-Your-Own Adventure” vibe while simultaneously speculating about the nature of stories and how we respond to them: For instance, of a minor character named Piers who has injured his foot, Johnson asks, “How likely is it that he survives? How real do you want your fiction?” As she later observes, “A happy ending depends on when ‘The End’ is written, by whom and for whom.” In Johnson’s previous book, “The River Bank,” a sequel to Kenneth Grahame’s “The Wind in the Willows,” she effortlessly captured the tone of that pastoral classic while also creating some charming new animal characters, including a female same-sex couple. In “The Ghastly Spectre of Toad Hall,” Johnson returns to the River Bank with a Christmas ghost story set during a blizzard, one “so thick and fierce that it would have done justice to the works of Jack London.” When Toad is asked whether he might be afraid of a vengeful, ancestral ghost, that valiant amphibian scornfully replies, “Faugh! … A Toad does not cower, a Toad does not cringe and tremble and recoil!” Oh, really? “There was a moment’s silence as the friends recalled the many, many occasions when the Toad had in fact done all these things, in series and in parallel.” You’ll love this absolutely delightful sequel to ‘The Wind in the Willows’ Taking up half her new book, Johnson’s thrilling novella “The Dream-Quest of Vellitt Boe” is set in the nightmarish dreamland depicted by H.P. Lovecraft in several of his ornately written early stories. When a beautiful and brilliant student in the women’s college of Ulthar runs away with a handsome young stranger from the “waking-world,” her 55-year-old tutor, Vellitt Boe, springs into action. In her youth, Vellitt had been a far-traveler through the dream-lands, “born in the harbor town of Jaren, where the river Xari spilled into the northern reaches of the Cerenarian Sea, but in her nineteenth year she left, and for years after that she had voyaged: crossed plains and forests and fenlands, ascended mountains and walked in the belly of the under-realms, sailed in strange-hulled boats across unfamiliar oceans under the low sky.” As Vellitt pursues the runaways, hoping to catch them before they use the Silver Key to open the gates into the waking world, she encounters ghouls, zoogs, ghasts, night-gaunts, krakens, gugs and minor gods, visits ancient cities and temples, and discovers that one old friend, Reon Atescre of Sona Nyl, has become the High Priest Nasht while a former lover now rules the kingdom of Ilek-Vad. The latter’s name is none other than Randolph Carter, the hero of Lovecraft’s “The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath.” As Vellitt nostalgically recalls, “They had met in the marble streets of shining Celephais.” As should be clear, Johnson’s novella, the 2017 World Fantasy Award winner for longer fiction, is an affectionate, feminist revisioning of Lovecraft’s dreamland tales, which are themselves homages to the baroque early fantasies of Lord Dunsany. Inevitably, Vellitt’s quest leads her from the realm of Azathoth and that “crawling chaos” Nyarlathotep into another, even stranger realm. Might readers hope to some day learn more of this intrepid middle-aged heroine’s subsequent adventures? Any devotee of the author who gave us the finest modern work of science fiction, “The Book of the New Sun,” already owns the short-story collection, “The Best of Gene Wolfe.” Most of its contents first appeared in the 1970s, ’80s and ’90s, but a new posthumous collection, “The Wolfe at the Door,” gathers short works published as early as the 1950s and as late as 2013, just six years before Wolfe died, at age 87. The book opens with a warmly nostalgic reminiscence by Kim Stanley Robinson then follows with over 40 stories that are characteristically Wolfean — subtle, allusive, tricksy, beautifully written and sometimes strangely inconclusive. Beyond George R.R. Martin: A critic’s pick of science fiction and fantasy One novella here, “Memorare,” first published in 2007, revisits several familiar tropes about space travel and exploration, including that old standby, a seemingly idyllic world that cloaks a horrific reality. Onto this Wolfe overlays a more domestic narrative about love, marriage, spousal abuse, fidelity and sudden death. Everything moves right along until the end, which seems untrue to the character of its protagonist. Or did I miss something? With Wolfe one usually has. Whatever the case, any confirmed Wolfe fan will want what the writer himself regarded as stories “every bit as good as” those in “The Best of Gene Wolfe.” Of course, Wolfe was laughing at the time he said this, so how do you interpret that? With a foreword by Neil Gaiman and an introduction by Colin Smythe, Terry Pratchett’s “A Stroke of the Pen: The Lost Stories” contains the last pieces of fiction we are likely to see from the comic genius who created Discworld. Nearly all the stories first appeared in a small British newspaper called the Western Daily Press during the early 1970s when Pratchett — who died in 2015 at age 66 — was still learning his craft. Most are trifles, but delightful nonetheless, several being written for the Christmas season. Already, though, we can hear the mature Pratchett’s voice at the beginning of “How Scrooge Saw the Spectral Light (Ho! Ho! Ho!) and went Happily Back to Humbug.” It opens with the ominous appearance of a spectral Jacob Marley: “‘Oooooh, Ebenezer Scrooge, it is I, Marley, your old friend and business partner what accidentally fell off the top of a twelve-storey building, ahem,’ said the ghost.” That fall, it later becomes clear, wasn’t an accident. More reviews and essays by Michael Dirda Best of all, though, is the novella “The Quest for the Keys,” which was serialized over several months in 1984. In it, a wizard named Grubble the Utterly Untrustworthy needs a hero named Kron to bring him the Five Keys of Zag. When Kron says that’s all very nice, thank you, Grubble exclaims, “Nononono. You don’t say that, you say, ‘Not the Five Keys of Zag, whose fabulous treasure has been seen by no man for a thousand years, gosh, how marvelous, let me help you in your quest, O wizard, in exchange for not more than twenty percent of the treasure less expenses, when do I start?’” Sigh. We could certainly use more of Pratchett’s humor and wisdom just now. How apropos that, due to a typographical error, the motto of the major Discworld newspaper is “The Truth Will Make You Fret.” Of course, it’s another universally acknowledged truth that if you read just one of Pratchett’s books, you’ll want to read everything he wrote. That now includes “A Stroke of the Pen.” More from Book World Love everything about books? Make sure to subscribe to our Book Club newsletter , where Ron Charles guides you through the literary news of the week. Check out our coverage of this year’s Pulitzer winners: Jayne Anne Phillips won the fiction prize for her novel “ Night Watch .” The nonfiction prize went to Nathan Thrall, for “ A Day in the Life of Abed Salama .” Cristina Rivera Garza received the memoir prize for “ Liliana’s Invincible Summer .” And Jonathan Eig received the biography prize for his “ King: A Life .” Best books of 2023: See our picks for the 10 best books of 2023 or dive into the staff picks that Book World writers and editors treasured in 2023. Check out the complete lists of 50 notable works for fiction and the top 50 nonfiction books of last year. Find your favorite genre: Three new memoirs tell stories of struggle and resilience, while five recent historical novels offer a window into other times. Audiobooks more your thing? We’ve got you covered there, too . If you’re looking for what’s new, we have a list of our most anticipated books of 2024 . And here are 10 noteworthy new titles that you might want to consider picking up this April. Comments A note to our readers We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program, an affiliate advertising program designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and affiliated sites. Sign up washingtonpost.com © 1996-2025 The Washington Post washingtonpost.com © 1996-2025 The Washington Post 