 
 Editor's Desk: Written by a Human by Neil Clarke : Clarkesworld Magazine – Science Fiction & Fantasy 
 Skip to content 
 C larkesworl D 
 SCIENCE FICTION & FANTASY MAGAZINE 
 ☰ MENU 
 About Us 
 Subscribe 
 Back Issues 
 Cover Gallery 
 Podcast 
 Submissions 
 Mailing List 
 Support Us 
 Advertising 
 × 
 ABOUT US 
 SUBSCRIBE 
 BACK ISSUES 
 COVER GALLERY 
 PODCAST 
 SUBMISSIONS 
 MAILING LIST 
 SUPPORT US 
 ADVERTISING 
 BROWSE BY 
 FICTION 
 AUDIO FICTION 
 ARTICLES 
 INTERVIEWS 
 AWARDS & RECOGNITION 
 AUTHORS & ARTISTS 
 EXPLORE 
 RANDOM STORY 
 RANDOM PODCAST 
 SEARCH 
 Search for: 
 FOLLOW US ON 
 Issue 199 – April 2023 
 Editorial 
 Editor's Desk: Written by a Human 
 by Neil Clarke 
 It’s not often that our little corner of the world feels like it is on fire, but we’re actually fighting more than one at the moment. In last month’s issue, I highlighted the threat caused by the discontinuation of Amazon’s magazine subscription program for the Kindle, one of our primary sources of income. If you haven’t read that, I’d appreciate it if you jumped back to that issue and gave it a look. I know this month’s topic, by newspaper standards, is a bit more attractive, but the other is far more worrisome. 
 One quick update to last month’s story: The KU subscriptions we mentioned in that piece are now available. If you decide to subscribe there, please know that we won’t be compensated unless you actually open the ebook edition for each issue and read some of it. None of the other subscription options we offer work that way and they all pay us better per subscriber. 
 Ok, now onto fire #2. 
 In February, we attracted a considerable amount of media attention over the impact of ChatGPT and other Large Language Models (LLMs) on our submissions process. In short, for the first time in over a decade we closed story submissions for something other than a server or software update. What happened? We were receiving a large number of submissions generated by ChatGPT. We received fifty of them the morning we closed and over five hundred in under twenty days that month. (For comparative purposes, we had received seven hundred human-written submissions in the same time period.) Generated submissions were increasing daily and on-course to equal or outnumber human-written works by the end of the month. That workload was simply unsustainable. 
 I posted a short announcement about the closure via social media. It quickly went viral and the press started tracking me down. For the next week, I was interviewed by a steady stream of reporters. Over a month later, I’m still fielding calls and emails. We had become the proverbial canary in a coalmine for those concerned about how this technology could disrupt the workplace. The irony of “AI” impacting a science fiction magazine only added to the appeal. If you told me that one day I’d be on NPR and BBC Radio talking about Clarkesworld , I would have laughed at you. So far, there have been pieces in the New York Times, Washington Post, Los Angeles Times, Wired, Financial Times, New Scientist , Fox, NBC, with extensive foreign press coverage as well. 
 The response to the coverage has been largely sympathetic and the extra attention drew out some helpful advice from experts working in tangential fields like credit card fraud prevention, network security, and detection tools. A few people were upset that we were rejecting the “AI” works out of hand, but that simply made it clear that they hadn’t read or listened to any of the things we said. The generated works were among the worst submissions we’ve ever received and sometimes bad in entirely new ways. 
 Even before events exploded in February, our house policy was that we wouldn’t consider generated texts. That decision was based on currently unanswered legal and ethical concerns over the true ownership of said works and pending court cases regarding the use of copyrighted materials in the training of generative systems. (This was never about “AI” replacing authors. I find myself in agreement with what Ted Chiang says in his New Yorker article.) 
 Obviously, our policy didn’t stop people from trying, even after we started banning them for it. Genre writers would have known these works wouldn’t have had a chance, so the behavior was unusual. There was no point to taking the risk of being banned. We soon discovered, however, that these submissions were coming from outside the science fiction and fantasy community. 
 It turns out that we are the secondary victims of “make money with ChatGPT” schemes pushed on blogs, YouTube, and TikTok, by self-proclaimed side-hustle experts. No one expects to get rich from these schemes, but even a few hundred dollars can be a substantial sum to the people these blogs and videos target. In some ways, we were quite fortunate that the numbers we faced were in the hundred and not thousands or tens of thousands. Quantity is easy with generative models and it didn’t take much to shout out the legitimate submissions. 
 As I said, people who know how submissions work, know that this approach will fail. (Many magazines were targeted by these schemes and they ranged from airline magazines to science fiction publications–anyone that paid at least X, was around for a while, and typically open to submissions.) The scheme was never meant to work. It was all a setup, so when those “authors” came back claiming “it didn’t work,” the expert could reply, “buy my course where I reveal all the secrets I used.” That’s the actual scam. 
 It’s not just the scammers I hold responsible. The executives and investors rushing these applications out the door–for free and with insufficient guardrails and precautions–made this possible. The technology itself is brilliant and will no doubt accomplish great things, but the leadership of these companies also had a clear understanding of how it could be misused. In their enthusiasm, they ignored their responsibility to provide tools to help protect us from that. Reliable detection methods do not exist and what is available has had the appearance of an afterthought, PR control, or source of potential revenue. Even if you aren’t bothered by the trouble it has caused for us, it’s not difficult to imagine how people could abuse these tools to commit fraud and spread disinformation on a grand scale. 
 But I’m drifting. That line of conversation is important, but a distraction from how we address our current situation. 
 Open submissions are where we acquire the stories we publish. We’re rather militant about keeping the door open to all authors, everywhere. When the news first broke, well-meaning people offered suggestions like: 
 “Charge submission fees.” 
 “Use paper submissions.” 
 “Only accept submissions from people you know.” 
 “Just solicit what you need.” 
 “Ban the countries that are producing the bulk of these submissions.” 
 “Use identity services to verify they are who they say they are.” 
 “This is the future. Get used to it!” 
 I’ll address that last one separately, but the end result of the other suggestions would have had a disproportionate impact on new, disadvantaged, or international authors. Science fiction stands on the shoulders of those that come before and these authors are the next rung in that ladder. I think it’s even more important in short fiction, where publishers are more inclined to take risks. It’s also a critical feeder to other parts of the genre such as novels or even the film industry. 
 Unfriendly submissions practices present in the industry have already closed too many doors. These solutions would have closed many more by creating financial barriers, locking out people because of where they live, or worse, ignoring the unknown–which feels very anti-SF to me. The consequences of those solutions were simply unacceptable to us. 
 We don’t have to “get used to” the negative consequences of these tools. Society didn’t roll over when spam started hitting our inboxes, when DDOS attacks came after networks, when viruses started infecting our computers . . . Humanity responded by developing countermeasures. Those previously-mentioned experts in tangential fields provided perspective and a starting point from which to build. Much like their own situations, it will be a long-term battle as the technology and approaches of those that use it evolve. 
 The talk around here for the last month has been “how can we build something like a spam filter for submissions?” I’ve been discussing this with other editors and people who write submission systems. I have ideas and a basic direction. The small things I’ve been able to do so far have allowed us to reopen submissions and stay open for now. Each day is a victory, but we know that it’s likely we’ll have to close again at some point. Round one was simplistic by my standards. We’ve been lucky. 
 So, that’s where we are now, looking for ways to control fire #2 while #1 complicates and destabilizes our income. Income we’ll likely need to help adapt and maintain our processes. Fun times. Even if the legal and ethical issues concerning generated works are resolved, we’ll still have to address the fact that the sheer speed and output of these systems will be able to bury us in submissions. That makes it clear that we can’t solve this on our own. We will remain committed to keeping the doors open for new writers as long as we can. Along the way, we’ll look for, and hope to find, like-minded people who can help us achieve that goal. Wish us luck! 
 Author profile Neil Clarke Website Neil Clarke is the editor of Clarkesworld Magazine, Forever Magazine, and several anthologies, including the Best Science Fiction of the Year series. He is a four-time winner of the Hugo Award for Best Editor Short Form, three-time winner of the Locus Award for Best Editor, a four-time winner of the Chesley Award for Best Art Director, and a recipient of the Kate Wilhelm Solstice Award. He currently lives in NJ with his wife and two sons. Other Works Neil Clarke https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/ Editor's Desk: The Other Shoe by Neil Clarke Neil Clarke https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/ Editor's Desk: A European Adventure and More by Neil Clarke Neil Clarke https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/ Editor's Desk: July Is for Survivors by Neil Clarke Neil Clarke https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/ Editor's Desk: One for the Team by Neil Clarke Neil Clarke https://clarkesworldmagazine.com/author/neil-clarke/ Editor's Desk: The Stars in Our Sky by Neil Clarke Share this page on: 
 PURCHASE THIS ISSUE: 
 Amazon Kindle Amazon Print Edition Apple Books EPUB B&N EPUB Bookshop.org EPUB Fable EPUB Kobo EPUB Weightless EPUB/MOBI/PDF 
 Browse By 
 Fiction 
 Audio Fiction 
 Articles 
 Interviews 
 Editorials 
 Awards & Recognition 
 Authors & Artists 
 Random Story 
 Random Podcast 
 Follow Us On 
 SUBSCRIBE AT 
 B&N Nook Newsstand 
 Patreon 
 ClarkesworldCitizens 
 Weightless Books 
 Search for: 
 ISSN 1937-7843 · Clarkesworld Magazine © 2006-2026 Wyrm Publishing. Robot illustration by Serj Iulian. 
