











Strategies of Fantasy 











Strategies of Fantasy 


Strategies of Fantasy 


BRIAN ATTEBERY 





Indiana University Press 


BLOOMINGTON AND INDIANAPOLIS 


GHLING GHEE ery avy 
CNIVERSITY Usrarice 


© 1992 by Brian Attebery 
All rights reserved 


No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by 
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and 
recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. The Association of American 
University Presses’ Resolution on Permissions constitutes the only 
exception to this prohibition. 


The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed 
Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984. 


Manufactured in the United States of America 


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 


Attebery, Brian, date. 
Strategies of fantasy / Brian Attebery. 


p. (FMi. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 0-25 3-31070-9 (cloth) 

1. Fantastic fiction, American—History and criticism—Theory, 
etc. 2. Fantastic fiction, English—history and criticism—Theory, 
etc. 3. Fantastic litcerature—History and criticism—Theory, etc. 
4. Postmodernism (Literature) I. Title. 
PS374.F27A87 1992 
813'.0876609—dc20 


123459695 94 93 92 


91-15884 


ONE 
TWO 
THREE 
FOUR 
FIVE 
SIX 
SEVEN 
EIGHT 


CONTENTS 


Introduction Vil 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 

Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 
Fantasy and Postmodernism 

Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 
Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 
Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 

Science Fantasy 


Recapturing the Modern World for the 
Imagination 


Works Cited 143 
Index 149 


Introduction 


In the last few years the number of studies of fantastic literature has grown 
prodigiously. From a few pioneering attempts to define and delimit the 
field, such as W. R. Irwin’s The Game of the Impossible (1976), the field 
has grown to include author studies, historical surveys, thematic analyses, 
and several essay collections and conference volumes. This proliferation 
indicates a growing academic interest in a body of literature that deliber- 
ately violates the generic conventions of realism, conventions that not too 
long ago were generally used as defining criteria for great or serious fic- 
tion. 

Looking at this sizable and growing body of critical and scholarly 
work on the fantastic, one might be tempted to conclude that there is no 
need for further words on the subject, first, because the fantastic has now 
achieved proper recognition from the literary establishment and, second, 
because anything worth saying has been said. The first of these premises is 
easily disproved. Just ask a Henry James scholar to read Gene Wolfe, a 
writer of comparable skill and an equal love of indirection and ambiguity, 
and see what kind of response you get. A look through recent feminist 
literary theory may turn up references to Joanna Russ’s criticism, but 
rarely will one find mention of her fantastic fiction. Though fine studies of 
fantasy have appeared in specialist journals like Extrapolation and the 
Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts, most literary periodicals seem either 
unaware of its existence or convinced of its unimportance. 

The second premise, that the fantasy field has been sufficiently map- 
ped and measured, is harder to answer. Such works as Stephen Prickett’s 
Victorian Fantasy (1979), Tobin Siebers’s The Romantic Fantastic (1984), 
and E. F Bleiler’s survey Supernatural Fiction Writers (1985) are excellent 
guides to the historical development of the field. C. N. Manlove’s Modern 
Fantasy (1975) and The Impulse of Fantasy Literature (1983) offer care 
ful critical readings of classic fantasy texts. Ann Swinfen’s In Defense « 
Fantasy (1984) offers a useful typology. Kathryn Hume explores tt 
relationship of the fantastic to realistic representation in Fantasy an¢ 
Mimesis (1984). My own The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature 
(1980) traces the cultural roots of fantasy literature and especially its 


VII 


VIII Introduction 


imitation and incorporation of elements from magical folk narratives. I 
certainly thought, after writing that study, that | had nothing further to 
say on the subject. 

Yet here I am introducing another book on fantasy. Credit (or blame) 
must go to two bodies of texts that have appeared or come to general 
attention in the decade since The Fantasy Tradition was published. The 
first is a burst of exciting new fantasy that has not only given me much 
pleasure but also made me rethink the dimensions and properties of the 
genre. Hence much of the discussion in the following pages concerns 
relatively recent fiction, though older texts might profitably be reex- 
amined for the characteristics foregrounded within the newer. 

The second group of texts consists of theoretical studies of narrative 
itself. Gérard Genette’s analysis of time, Seymour Chatman’s redefinition 
of character, Bakhtin’s belatedly influential theory of the dialogical nature 
of the novel, Hirsch and Abel’s identification of primarily feminine pat- 
terns of narrative development, structural and post-structural modes of 
analysis—these and other theoretical enterprises have altered our under- 
standing of the processes of generating and reading fictional texts. 
Thereby we have been granted new visions of the texts themselves. Many 
of these theories interact quite excitingly with fantasy texts. Much recent 
fantasy is, indeed, a product of the same ferment that spurred the theoriz- 
ing, sometimes with the author’s active and conscious intent (as is the case 
with Samuel Delany, Ursula K. Le Guin, or John Crowley) and some- 
times, apparently, through unconscious absorption from the air. Our 
Postmodern moment is permeated with, is defined by, questionings of 
yelfhood and self-reference and narrativity and closure. 

When the new fantasy is read together with the new theory, both are 

nced. What we cannot describe we cannot see, and the traditional! 
\age of literary criticism offers no words for the temporal disruptions 
iana Wynne Jones or the multivocal narrations of John Crowley. 
at’s going on? asks the traditional critic, confronted by a text in which 
saracter, point of view, or conflict, as we thought we knew them in Jane 
Austen or George Eliot, are barely present. This book tries to identify 
some of what is going on, to indicate some of the hidden riches in fantasy, 
making use of insights developed often in response to quite different sorts 
of narrative. What Genette found in Proust, for example, illuminates 
fantasy, even as the fantastic text may force an expansion of Genette’s 
theoretical apparatus. Most particularly, theoretical insights that have 
arisen in response to the narratives of Calvino, Borges, Cortazar, Barth, 
and Pynchon prove as well to apply to fantasy, even formula fantasy, as I 
hope will become evident. 
I have used the title “Strategies of Fantasy” to try to indicate my 


Introduction 1X 


multiple purpose. I examine some of the intriguing recent texts to try to 
determine what strategies of presentation and development allow them to 
achieve the fantastic. I also point out some strategies available within the 
fantastic that allow writers to reinvent narrative and all of its components. 
Finally, | suggest some strategies for reading fantasy, some questions to 
ask the texts that would not occur to the reader of realistic fiction. Once 
those questions are asked, I believe, they change our view of all narrative 
literature, both fantastic and nonfantastic. 

Because fantasy has generally been excluded from the canon of great 
literature—and continues to be excluded despite the demonstrable merits 
of many of its examples—it can provide a place to stand and judge the 
canon itself. Readers of fantasy have a certain freedom which is denied to 
readers within the pale. We may roam at will from adult to children’s 
books, from formula fiction to experimental metafiction, finding pleasure 
in the most abstruse text and hidden complexity in the most conventional. 
We may find a continuity in literature that is denied to those who must 
draw lines and enforce standards. Even though IJ begin chapter 1 by subdi- 
viding the fantastic into what may seem to be hierarchical! categories, | 
wish to assert an overriding kinship among fantastic texts. The mass- 
market paperback fantasy with a lurid cover is like the limited-edition 
excursion into fiction by the well-known poet in one all-important re- 
spect. Both are outside the culturally defined norm; both are Other. 

That otherness makes the fantastic resemble another noncanonical 
literary category: women’s writing. The ability or inability to read fantasy 
with pleasure divides educated readers nearly as sharply as does gender. 
Moreover, the deliberate act of “reading as a woman”—which, as 
Jonathan Culler points out, is an activity that must be learned, within our 
patriarchal literary tradition, even by women (64)—disrupts some of the 
same hierarchies of value and conventions of form that the strategies of 
fantasy deconstruct. What seemed necessary becomes contingent; what 
was excluded or occluded is brought into view. 

The parallel is reinforced by looking at the number of women writers 
who have found fantasy congenial to their interests as readers and their 
needs as writers. In chapter 6 | suggest a specific use of fantasy by women 
writers interested in making the coming-of-age story their own, but the 
affinity goes beyond any one theme or narrative type. In her acceptance 
speech for the 1989 Pilgrim Award, Ursula K. Le Guin explicitly makes 
the connection between the exclusion of women’s texts and what she calls 
the “genrification” of nonrealistic forms like fantasy. “I first thought 
about this issue of genrification,” she says, “not as a woman writer but as 
a writer of science fiction, fantasy, children’s books, and young adult 
books—four fictional modes categorized by both publishers and academ- 


x Introduction 


ics as genres, and thereby, by the simple designation, excluded from 
serious criticism and consideration as literature.” But later, “having been 
myself so thoroughly genrified, | was quite ready to accept the feminist 
perception of the construction of Literature as essentially political, an 
issue of power and control” (“Spike” 18~19). 

Le Guin points out that even though genre ought to be a neutral 
descriptive term, applying to the dominant mode of narrative realism as 
well as to such categories as science fiction or mystery, it is applied only to 
those genres whose primary readership is outside the power structure of 
the academy (“Spike” 19). Many women write in the modes Le Guin lists, 
and many of the best are undervalued for that reason. That they find such 
genres congenial, nonetheless, is evidence for my argument that nonreal- 
istic literature has something special to offer to the woman writer, who is 
already defined by her culture as the irrational, the disruptive, the form- 
less, the Other. According to Jonathan Culler, “in recent French writing 
‘woman’ has come to stand for any radical force that subverts the con- 
cepts, assumptions, and structures of traditional male discourse” (61). In 
this sense, fantastic literature is a woman, a woman who looks, at various 
times, like Joanna Russ, like Suzette Haden Elgin, like Sheri S. Tepper, 
like Ursula K. Le Guin. 

Whether it is seen as threatening or trivial, fantasy is all too often 
ignored by serious readers of fiction. Although fantasy has a large and 
loyal readership, it lacks the cultural sanction that allows academics to 
admit to reading detective novels, another mode that spans the gap 
between popular and elite culture. The same readers who devour myster- 
ies by Tony Hillerman and Sara Paretsky scorn to look into books by 
equally gifted practitioners of the fantastic, say, Roger Zelazny or Marion 
Zimmer Bradley. Thus, many of the readers who are best prepared to 
appreciate the more revolutionary strategies of fantasy will never do so, 
because they will never open the right books. 

While it is not easy to explain the marginalization of fantastic liter- 
ature on grounds of merit, one can find evidence of the sources of the split 
and the ways it has been justified. Since the time of Cervantes, literary 
mapmakers have been redrawing the boundaries of narrative. Whereas 
once upon a time (I use the phrase advisedly) storytelling was divided into 
things that were true—history—and things that weren’t—romance—now 
the division comes at quite another point. Once the realistic novel was 
invented, it claimed kinship to history and denied its ties to romance. 
Hence, the gulf opened between histories true or feigned, on the one 
hand, and fantasies, on the other. Accordingly, the more history-like a 
novel seemed, the more highly it was regarded, and the less incentive 
writers had to exploit the romance-like potential of the form. 


Introduction XI 


John Crowley outlines the historical progression in his meta-fantasy 
A gypt (1987): 


There had been a story in the beginning—in his own childhood and 
human race’s—that a child could inhabit, an account that could be taken 
literally, about Adamuneve and Christopher Clumbus and a sun with a 
face and a moon with one too, a stock of stories never discarded but only 
outgrown, gratefully, name by face, like an old sunsuit. Stories, outgrown 
just as grownups had always hinted he would outgrow them when with 
fierce literalness he would try to get one or another outlandish detail 
certified or explained, stories, their aging fabric giving under his fingers. 
(78) 


The outgrown realm of romance never entirely disappeared. Instead, it 
was relegated, as we have seen, to the margins: to children’s books and 
Saturday matinees and, in rationalized form, to popular storytelling 
modes like the Western, the detective story, and the formula fantasy. 
Critical wisdom held that some of these modes were to be dismissed 
patronizingly, “gratefully,” as Crowley says; others should be scorned. 

Thus we now have book reviewers and teachers of literature who boast 
of being unable to read fantasy. They cannot say why: whether it is con- 
tent or form they object to, magic or reconciliation. They expect all 
romance to be escapist, all fairy tale to be arch and precious, and those 
expectations govern their response. They do not realize that these negative 
qualities are partly the result of the division to which they have acceded, 
between the real and the un. That division grants significance and sub- 
stance only to historical and pseudo-historical narratives, leaving the 
fantastic only a certain airy sweetness, like a meringue. 

Yet those who have outgrown romance and rejected fantasy cannot 
fully understand even their own chosen form, the realistic novel, if they 
understand only its resemblance to narratives of the real, to history o1 
science. Like the hero of Agypt, they have “got something fearfully 
wrong” (79). They forget that history is only half of lived reality, and that 
the other half has somehow to do with mysteries, quests, heroes, comedy, 
tragedy, impossibilities, symbols, order, and resolution, none of them to 
be found in the empirical world, the world of historical fact, but always 
and only in the stories by which we make sense of history (Hayden White, 
Content 149). 

The fantasies I examine in this book pose particularly interesting 
questions about the space between history and fiction because they mark 
off that space in unorthodox and ever-changing ways. Like the European 
and Latin American masters of the postmodernist metafiction, many con- 
temporary British and American fantasists find popular modes conducive 





x Introduction 


ics as genres, and thereby, by the simple designation, excluded from 
serious criticism and consideration as literature.” But later, “having been 
myself so thoroughly genrified, 1 was quite ready to accept the feminist 
perception of the construction of Literature as essentially political, an 
issue of power and control” (“Spike” 18—19). 

Le Guin points out that even though genre ought to be a neutral 
descriptive term, applying to the dominant mode of narrative realism as 
well as to such categories as science fiction or mystery, it is applied only to 
those genres whose primary readership is outside the power structure of 
the academy (“Spike” 19). Many women write in the modes Le Guin lists, 
and many of the best are undervalued for that reason. That they find such 
genres congenial, nonetheless, is evidence for my argument that nonreal- 
istic literature has something special to offer to the woman writer, who ts 
already defined by her culture as the irrational, the disruptive, the form- 
less, the Other. According to Jonathan Culler, “in recent French writing 
‘woman’ has come to stand for any radical force that subverts the con- 
cepts, assumptions, and structures of traditional male discourse” (61). In 
this sense, fantastic literature is a woman, a woman who looks, at various 
times, like Joanna Russ, like Suzette Haden Elgin, like Sheri S. Tepper, 
like Ursula K. Le Guin. 

Whether it is seen as threatening or trivial, fantasy is all too often 
ignored by serious readers of fiction. Although fantasy has a large and 
loyal readership, it lacks the cultural sanction that allows academics to 
admit to reading detective novels, another mode that spans the gap 
between popular and elite culture. The same readers who devour myster- 
ies by Tony Hillerman and Sara Paretsky scorn to look into books by 
equally gifted practitioners of the fantastic, say, Roger Zelazny or Marion 
Zimmer Bradley. Thus, many of the readers who are best prepared to 
appreciate the more revolutionary strategies of fantasy will never do so, 
because they will never open the right books. 

While it is not easy to explain the marginalization of fantastic liter- 
ature on grounds of merit, one can find evidence of the sources of the split 
and the ways it has been justified. Since the time of Cervantes, literary 
mapmakers have been redrawing the boundaries of narrative. Whereas 
once upon a time (I use the phrase advisedly) storytelling was divided into 
things that were true—history—and things that weren’t—romance—now 
the division comes at quite another point. Once the realistic novel was 
invented, it claimed kinship to history and denied its ties to romance. 
Hence, the gulf opened between histories true or feigned, on the one 
hand, and fantasies, on the other. Accordingly, the more history-like a 
novel seemed, the more highly it was regarded, and the less incentive 
writers had to exploit the romance-like potential of the form. 


Introduction XI 


John Crowley outlines the historical progression in his meta-fantasy 
A gypt (1987): 


There had been a story in the beginning—in his own childhood and 
human race’s—that a child could inhabit, an account that could be taken 
literally, about Adamuneve and Christopher Clumbus and a sun with a 
face and a moon with one too, a stock of stories never discarded but only 
outgrown, gratefully, name by face, like an old sunsuit. Stories, outgrown 
just as grownups had always hinted he would outgrow them when with 
fierce literalness he would try to get one or another outlandish detail 
certified or explained, stories, their aging fabric giving under his fingers. 
(78) 


The outgrown realm of romance never entirely disappeared. Instead, it 
was relegated, as we have seen, to the margins: to children’s books and 
Saturday matinees and, in rationalized form, to popular storytelling 
modes like the Western, the detective story, and the formula fantasy. 
Critical wisdom held that some of these modes were to be dismissed 
patronizingly, “gratefully,” as Crowley says; others should be scorned. 

Thus we now have book reviewers and teachers of literature who boast 
of being unable to read fantasy. They cannot say why: whether it is con- 
tent or form they object to, magic or reconciliation. They expect all 
romance to be escapist, all fairy tale to be arch and precious, and those 
expectations govern their response. They do not realize that these negative 
qualities are partly the result of the division to which they have acceded, 
between the real and the un. That division grants significance and sub- 
stance only to historical and pseudo-historical narratives, leaving the 
fantastic only a certain airy sweetness, like a meringue. 

Yet those who have outgrown romance and rejected fantasy cannot 
fully understand even their own chosen form, the realistic novel, if they 
understand only its resemblance to narratives of the real, to history or 
science. Like the hero of Agypt, they have “got something fearfully 
wrong” (79). They forget that history is only half of lived reality, and that 
the other half has somehow to do with mysteries, quests, heroes, comedy, 
tragedy, impossibilities, symbols, order, and resolution, none of them to 
be found in the empirical world, the world of historical fact, but always 
and only in the stories by which we make sense of history (Hayden White, 
Content 149). 

The fantasies I examine in this book pose particularly interesting 
questions about the space between history and fiction because they mark 
off that space in unorthodox and ever-changing ways. Like the European 
and Latin American masters of the postmodernist metafiction, many con- 
temporary British and American fantasists find popular modes conducive 





XII Introduction 


to exploring fundamental principles of signification. They see the story- 
teller’s art as an ancient and worthy one, and entertainment as an essential 
part of, rather than a hindrance to, serious consideration of the human 
condition. They are redrawing the map, sallying forth from the mountain 
fastnesses of fairy kingdoms to recapture territory long lost to the recon- 
structive imagination. 

All of the essays in this volume are attempts, first, to demonstrate how 
these writers are broadening the range of modern fantasy and, second, to 
find a theoretical base that can account for their ability to do so. The 
particular reading strategies I adopt are influenced by the contemporary 
critical climate. Structuralism, semiotics, reader-response theory, femi- 
nism, and Bakhtinian dialogism, for example, are the fashionable ways of 
approaching texts. It may be only an accident of my immersion in the 
current scholarly conversation that makes me see these as especially 
revealing of fantasy’s enabling mechanisms. Yet because a major result of 
many of these theories has been an overturning of class- and gender-based 
canons, they promise to be tremendously liberating to the study of non- 
canonical fantasy texts. At least these theories provide new contexts and, 
by doing so, according to the theories, generate new texts as well, trans- 
forming even such familiar narratives as The Lord of the Rings. 

The plan of this book reflects my own sense, not only of achievements 

ain the literature of fantasy, but also of the chief misunderstandings of 

mode. First, in chapter 1, | attempt to sort out different uses of the 

1 fantasy, which is, even within its strictly literary applications, vari- 

sly applied to a nearly universal impulse, a still-evolving genre, and a 
strict storytelling formula. Next, focusing on fantasy as genre, chapter 2 
looks at a text which forced many readers to recognize that a genre had 
formed or was in the process of forming out of a group of disparate and 
eccentric texts. The publication of The Lord of the Rings (1954-55), and, 
even more strongly, the enormous response to its appearance, has been in 
large measure responsible for separating modern fantasy from its various 
ancestral forms. Thus, Tolkien’s text is a good test case for theories of 
representation and the fantastic, and, as I hope to show, a test that many 
theorists fail. 

Chapters 3 through 5 deal with the relation of fantasy to literary con- 
ventions old and new: the traditional narrative building blocks of charac- 
ter and chronology as well the characteristically postmodern device of 
metafictionality. In each case, the strategies of the fantasist undermine our 
sense of the inevitability of conventional modes of narration, thereby 
reinvigorating the art of narrative. 

The last three chapters are all, in different ways, concerned with the 
relation of text to world. Chapter 6 describes the role that fantastic fiction 


Introduction XI 


is playing in women’s reinvention of themselves and their place in society 
and the cosmos. In chapter 7, a hybrid form, science fantasy, shows how 
the rhetoric and devices of fantasy can be used to reinterpret the narratives 
that make up science, though we usually think of scientific truths as being 
somehow more real than the reality we perceive directly. Finally, in chap- 
ter 8, I attempt to deal with stories that explicitly challenge the division 
between reality and imagination, not by saying that fantasy is real but by 


implying that reality requires something like fantasy to give structure to 
its otherwise random and inexplicable events. 


Many ideas in this book were first worked out in addresses and 
articles. | am grateful to the following publishers for permission to reprint 
materials that reappear from earlier versions: Greenwood Press for a 
version of chapter 3 called “Tolkien, Crowley, and Postmodernism,” pub- 
lished in The Shape of the Fantastic: Selected Essays from the Seventh 
International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts, edited by Olena H. 
Saciuk (1990); Orion Publishing and Carl Yoke for sections of chapters 4 
and 5 derived from “Fantasy’s Reconstruction of Narrative Conventions,” 
Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 1:1 (1988); The Kent State University 
Press for the part of chapter 6 contained in “Women’s Coming of Age in 
Fantasy,” Extrapolation 28 (Spring 1987); Southern Illinois University 
Press for a section of chapter 7 that appeared as “Science Fantasy anc 
Myth” in Intersections: Fantasy and Science Fiction, edited by George } 
Slusser and Eric S. Rabkin (1987); and the Mythopoeic Society (P.O. Bo 
6707, Altadena, California 91003) and Glen H. GoodKnight for portion. 
of chapter 8, which is an expansion of my guest of honor speech entitled 
“Reclaiming the Modern World for the Imagination,” published in Myth- 
lore 56 (Winter 1988). 


Quotations from Little, Big (copyright © 1981 by John Crowley) used 
by permission of Bantam Books, a division of Bantam Doubleday, Dell 
Pulishing Group, Inc. 


I also thank those who have read and commented upon parts of the 
manuscript, including John Kijinski, Colin Manlove, and Seymour Chat- 
man. I found their criticisms helpful in locating flaws, though I have not 
always followed advice in repairing them. Others have heard me try out 
ideas at meetings of the Science Fiction Research Association, the Mytho- 
poeic Society, and the International Conference on the Fantastic in the 
Arts; I wish to thank those groups for their suggestions and their support 
of the study of fantasy. For support of a different sort, thanks to Jennifer 





0 


Introduction 
XII 


to exploring fundamental principles of signification. They see the ee 
teller’s art as an ancient and worthy one, and entertainment . ap sae 
part of, rather than a hindrance to, serious consideration of the human 
condition. They are redrawing the map, sallying forth from the mountain 
fastnesses of fairy kingdoms to recapture territory long lost to the recon- 
structive imagination. 

All of the essays in this volume are attempts, first, to demonstrate how 
these writers are broadening the range of modern fantasy and, second, to 
Gnd a theoretical base that can account for their ability to do so. The 
particular reading strategies I adopt are influenced by the contemporary 
critical climate. Structuralism, semiotics, reader-response theory, femi- 
nism, and Bakhtinian dialogism, for example, are the fashionable ways of 
approaching texts. It may be only an accident of my immersion in the 
current scholarly conversation that makes me see these as especially 
revealing of fantasy’s enabling mechanisms. Yet because a major result of 
many of these theories has been an overturning of class- and gender-based 
canons, they promise to be tremendously liberating to the study of non- 
canonical fantasy texts. At least these theories provide new contexts and, 
by doing so, according to the theories, generate new texts as well, trans- 
forming even such familiar narratives as The Lord of the Rings. 

The plan of this book reflects my own sense, not only of achievements 
within the literature of fantasy, but also of the chief misunderstandings of 
the mode. First, in chapter 1, I attempt to sort out different uses of the 
term fantasy, which is, even within its strictly literary applications, vari- 
ously applied to a nearly universal impulse, a still-evolving genre, and a 
strict storytelling formula. Next, focusing on fantasy as genre, chapter 2 
looks at a text which forced many readers to recognize that a genre had 
formed or was in the process of forming out of a group of disparate and 
eccentric texts. The publication of The Lord of the Rings (1954—55), and, 
aia more strongly, the enormous response to its appearance, has been in 
eine tee a Separating modern fantasy from its various 

; lens text Is a good test case for theories of 


representation and the fantastic, and 
bs as I hope to show, a 
theorists fail. ; , Pp , a test that many 


Chapters 3 through 5 deal with the r 


elati ; 
ventions old and ion of fantasy to literary con 


. ol os : ee 
new: the traditional narrative building blocks of charac- 


ter and chronology ’ 
as well the characteristi 
Stical 
metafictionality. In each ly postmodern device of 


reinvigorating the art of narrative 
The last thr Eki 
ier Scape all, in different ways, concerned with the 
- -hapter 6 describes the role that fantastic fiction 








Introduction XII 


is playing in women’s reinvention of themselves and their place in society 
and the cosmos. In chapter 7, a hybrid form, science fantasy, shows how 
the rhetoric and devices of fantasy can be used to reinterpret the narratives 
that make up science, though we usually think of scientific truths as being 
somehow more real than the reality we perceive directly. Finally, in chap- 
ter 8, I attempt to deal with stories that explicitly challenge the division 
between reality and imagination, not by saying that fantasy is real but by 
implying that reality requires something like fantasy to give structure to 
its otherwise random and inexplicable events. 


Many ideas in this book were first worked out in addresses and 
articles. | am grateful to the following publishers for permission to reprint 
materials that reappear from earlier versions: Greenwood Press for a 
version of chapter 3 called “Tolkien, Crowley, and Postmodernism,” pub- 
lished in The Shape of the Fantastic: Selected Essays from the Seventh 
International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts, edited by Olena H. 
Saciuk (1990); Orion Publishing and Carl Yoke for sections of chapters 4 
and 5 derived from “Fantasy’s Reconstruction of Narrative Conventions,” 
Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 1:1 (1988); The Kent Srate University 
Press for the part of chapter 6 contained in “Women’s Coming of Age in 
Fantasy,” Extrapolation 28 (Spring 1987); Southern Illinois University 
Press for a section of chapter 7 that appeared as “Science Fantasy and 
Myth” in Intersections: Fantasy and Science Fiction, edited by George E. 
Slusser and Eric S. Rabkin (1987); and the Mythopoeic Society (P.O. Box 
6707, Altadena, California 91003) and Glen H. GoodKnight for portions 
of chapter 8, which is an expansion of my guest of honor speech entitled 
“Reclaiming the Modern World for the Imagination,” published in Myth- 
lore 56 (Winter 1988). 


Quotations from Little, Big (copyright © 1981 by John Crowley) aie 
by permission of Bantam Books, a division of Bantam Doubleday, De 


Pulishing Group, Inc. 
oe 












I also thank those wi! 
manuscript, includj 
man. I found tb 


always follov: 


B fe oush | have not 


eard me try out 
hers have h 4, the Mytho- 





A satiO -. 

ideas at m earch “tiie -antastic in the 
ee ce on . 

poeic onferen the ad their support 

Art ™ aks to Jennifer 


Dr theis Si 








XIV Introduction 


Eastman Attebery, who underwrote a semester of writing time, and to 
Erik Asard, who had a very flexible notion of my duties as a visiting 
lecturer at the Swedish Institute of North American Studies at the Univer- 
sity of Uppsala. Finally, I thank all the fantasists mentioned herein for 
giving me much pleasure and for teaching me, as Crowley’s A.gypt says, 


How history hungers for the shape of myth; how the plots and characters 
of fable and romance come to inhabit real courts and counting-houses 
and cathedrals; how old sciences die, and bequeath their myths and magic 
to their successors; how the heroes of legend pass away, fall asleep, are 
resurrected, and enter ordinary daylit history, persisting as a dream per- 
sists into waking life, altering and transforming it even when the dream 
itself has been forgotten or repressed. (166) 


Strategies of Fantasy 








ONE 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, 
Formula 


CONSIDER THE FOLLOWING DEFINITIONS: 


1. Fantasy is a form of popular escapist literature that combines stock 
characters and devices—wizards, dragons, magic swords, and the like— 
into a predictable plot in which the perennially understaffed forces of 
good triumph over a monolithic evil. 


2. Fantasy is a sophisticated mode of storytelling characterized by stylistic 
playfulness, self-reflexiveness, and a subversive treatment of established 
orders of society and thought. Arguably the major fictional mode of the 
late twentieth century, it draws upon contemporary ideas about sign 
systems and the indeterminacy of meaning and at the same time recap- 
tures the vitality and freedom of nonmimetic traditional forms such as 
epic, folktale, romance, and myth. 


Depending on the examples I choose, I can make an equally strong 
case for either claim. Fantasy is, indeed, both formula and mode: in one 
incarnation a mass-produced supplier of wish fulfillment, and in another 
a praise- and prize-worthy means of investigating the way we use fictions 
to construct reality itself. It is Italo Calvino and Jorge Luis Borges; it is 
also Piers Anthony and Robert E. Howard. But a term broad enough to 
include both Conan the Barbarian and Cosmicomics threatens to become 
meaningless. And what about earlier examples: can any definition also 
accommodate Alice in Wonderland, A Midsummer Night’s Dream, The 


i 


2 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Golden Ass, The Odyssey, and perhaps even Paradise Lost and The 
Divine Comedy? 

However, this breadth belongs only to fantasy-as-mode. Many readers 
would never think of including Shakespeare or Dante under the heading 
of fantasy. Instead, they associate the term fantasy with a popular story- 
telling formula that is restricted in scope, recent in origin, and specialized 
in audience and appeal. They are thinking of fantasy-as-formula, which is 
essentially a commercial product, with particular authors or publishers’ 
lines serving as brand names for the consumer. As a commercial product, 
its success depends on consistency and predictability: one expects every 
box of detergent to be interchangeable with every other. Therefore, the 
formula end of the fantasy scale is relatively easy to describe, though 
identifying all of its social functions may be more difficult. The fantastic 
mode, by contrast, is a vast subject, taking in all literary manifestations of 
the imagination’s ability to soar above the merely possible. 

It is difficult to say anything meaningful about either the mode, which 
is so vast, or the formula, which tends toward triviality. The task would be 
easier if there were an in-between category, something varied and capable 
of artistic development and yet limited to a particular period and a 
discernible structure. I find the concept of genre, as Goldilocks would say, 
just right. But before I propose ways of defining and studying fantasy as a 
genre, | must say more about both modes and formulas. The modal 
approach offers insights necessary for understanding the specific forms— 
genres or formulas—taken by the fantastic within a particular historical 
and cultural milieu. Analyzing a formula, on the other hand, can lead to 
an understanding of the structural basis of a related genre, for though the 
same grammatical rules may generate both, the formula’s structure is 
more visible, less cloaked in complexities of language and character and 

aeme. 

| Amodeis a way of doing something, in this case, of telling stories. But 

orytelling is a complicated business. In order to depict the essentials of 
character, dialogue, action, and physical setting, a writer must find ways 
not only to present but also to interpret appearance, behavior, thought, 
and speech. She must base her descriptions on some conception of iden- 
tity, causality, intentionality, and the benignity, malignity, or indifference of 
the universe. A mode is thus a stance, a position on the world as well as a 
means of portraying it. 

One of the most famous uses of the term mode is Northrop Frye’s 
fivefold division of literature into the mythic, romantic, high mimetic, low 
mimetic, and ironic modes. These are identifiable according to the status 
of a story’s primary characters: whether they are superior or inferior in 
degree or kind to their social and physical environment. But Frye sees this 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 3 


scheme, outlined in the Anatomy of Criticism (1957), as reflective of a 
more fundamental division: 


. the mimetic tendency itself, the tendency to verisimilitude and ac- 
curacy of description, is one of the two poles of literature. At the other 
pole is something that seems to be connected both with Aristotle’s word 
mythos and with the usual meaning of myth. That is, it is a tendency to 
tell a story which is in origin a story about characters who can do 
anything, and only gradually becomes attracted toward a tendency to tell 
a plausible or credible story. Myths of gods merge into legends of heroes; 
legends of heroes merge into plots of tragedies and comedies; plots of 
tragedies and comedies merge into plots of more or less realistic fiction. 


(5x) 


This underlying polarity is closer to what I mean by mode than are 
Frye’s modes themselves. One of these poles has been studied intensively. It 
is the mode of imitation, in which the aim is to produce the impression of 
faithfulness to ordinary experience. But the other end of the scale, the 
counterpoint to mimesis, is not so well established. Frye, in the passage 
quoted above, has trouble even naming it. It is like myth, he says, but he 
has already used “mythic.” We need another term for the ingredient 
which, when mixed five parts to one part mimesis, will produce myth; 
four parts to two for romance; equal portions for the high mimetic; and 
so on. 

This other pole is fantasy. As Kathryn Hume points out, fantasy and 
mimesis are the fundamental operations of the narrative imagination (x11). 
They are the more fundamental modes that define Frye’s scale of the 
mythic, the romantic, the ironic, and so on. In fantasy, characters can, as 
Frye says, do anything: fly, live forever, talk to the animals, metamorphose 
into cockroaches or gods. In mimesis, by contrast, characters are limited 
like everything else in the story they must conform to our sensory exper! 
ence of the real world. If the world were a simpler place and its rules les 
ambiguous, we might say that mimesis tells what is and fantasy tells what 
isn’t. 

But such a statement takes into account only the surface of reality. The 
mimesis that results is a superficial, commonsense imitation. Accordingly, 
even in pursuit of realism, storytellers have repeatedly introduced the 
fantastic. Though they are contrasting modes, mimesis and fantasy are 
not opposites. They can and do coexist within any given work; there are 
no purely mimetic or fantastic works of fiction. Mimesis without fantasy 
would be nothing but reporting one’s perceptions of actual events. Fantasy 
without mimesis would be a purely artificial invention, without recogniz- 
able objects or actions. Even if such a completely fantastic story could be 


4 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


written, no one could read it with any understanding or pleasure. Fantasy 
depends on mimesis for its effectiveness. We must have some solid ground 
to stand on, some point of contact, if only with the language in which the 
story is communicated. Less obviously, mimesis depends on something 
akin to fantasy for its ability to organize and interpret sensory data, 
because every organizing schema is the product of imagination rather than 
simple observation. 

Both modes are deeply rooted in ordinary, nonliterary experience. A 
child’s imitation of parental behavior is mimesis. So is telling on a friend, 
or drawing a tree. Lies, games, and dreams are all fantasy. A writer makes 
use of these modes, as he makes use of language, to construct an organ- 
ism, a story, of which the words, sentences, imitations, and imaginings are 
respectively the atoms, molecules, tissues, and organs. 

Within any given work, both modes operate more or less strongly, and 
with more or less success. Thus, a modal approach to literary texts pro- 
vides, first, a means of classifying and, second, a basis for evaluation. The 
realist bias in our critical tradition is such that many commentators 
confuse these two operations. Erich Auerbach’s monumental Mimests 
(1953), for instance, classifies and evaluates as if there were only one pole, 
one mode to be identified, one kind of literature worth reading. He gives 
no indication that a story may be both highly mimetic and bad. The 
temptation for a fantasy scholar, a temptation which J admit to falling 
into on occasion, is to reverse the bias, and say, “Don’t bother to read 

ich-and-such; it’s only a sort of journalism, and not a real story at all. It 
is no fantasy.” 

There are several advantages to studying the entire mode of the 
antastic. It is broad, so that any findings will have extensive potential 
application. Because it is a basic operation of narrative, its defining 
qualities may be arrived at through theoretical speculation, rather than 
through ad hoc description. It conforms to our ordinary use of the word 
fantasy, which covers a wide range of activities beyond a particular school 
of storytelling. As indicated above, it offers examples of unimpeachable 
literariness—Shakespeare, Swift, Dickens, Coleridge—whereas genre and 
formula fantasy texts are noncanonical by traditional standards. Indeed, 
most narrative literature, except for an aberrant period from the mid- 
nineteenth to mid-twentieth centuries (you see the temptation?), has made 
use of the fantastic. It has, as Hawthorne said, mingled the marvelous in 
order to heighten contrasts and to bring out the extraordinariness of story, 
as opposed to the ordinariness of daily life. 

But the modal approach does have its disadvantages. Though it prom- 
ises a theoretical basis, no one seems to agree on what sort of theory to 
apply. Is the fantastic a function of language, as J. R. R. Tolkien suggests: 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 5 


based on our ability to separate modifier from substantive and recombine 
them to produce green suns and flying serpents? Is it a function of 
psychology, based on the suppression and subsequent disguising of intol- 
erable realities? Of economics, indicating the misdirection of the revolu- 
tionary impulse in the disaffected artist? Of literary evolution, indicating 
that a worn-out genre is being subverted by its own unacknowledged 
contradictions? Is it a sort of game? A structure reflecting the brain’s own 
ordering mechanisms? A survival of myth into a rational age? 

All of these have been suggested as theoretical bases for the study of 
fantasy—and some of them, as we will see in the next chapter, as pretexts 
for condemning either the mode or the genre. Like all literary theories, 
these are derived from some field of study outside of literature and thus 
are most convincing when one already accepts the historical or psycho- 
logical or linguistic assumptions on which they are based. 

Any of the theories may be useful in dealing with some branch of the 
fantastic mode. Some fantasies are intimately connected with language; 
others are attempts to represent the processes of the psyche. Some reflect 
social dynamics; others convey an author’s or a society’s philosophy. 
Sometimes fantasy is a form of play, while at other times, or even at the 
same time, it is utterly serious. 

Yet the fantastic mode always seems larger than any theory that tries 
to encompass it. If we say fantasy is a function of language, what about 
unspoken or unwritten fantasies, as when a caveman draws a stag pierced 
by his spear or when René Magritte paints a locomotive emerging from 
the back wall of a fireplace? Both of these are fantastic, in some sense. The 
former represents one common use of the term fantasy: to designate 
something desired that, though it has not happened, we have no reason to 
believe could not happen. The latter is more like literary fantasy, in that it 
portrays a juxtaposition that we perceive as impossible. 

These examples indicate that fantasy is to some extent independent of 
language and may even predate it. Most pictorial fantasy is, however, 
found in conjunction with verbal narratives. Those that are not explicitly 
illustrative, like Tenniel’s accompaniments to Carroll’s Alice in Won- 
derland or Doré’s visualizations of Dante, still offer an invitation to the 
viewer to create a story that will bring about the unachieved or reconcile 
the impossible. Often the title, like Magritte’s Homesickness (Le mal du 
pays), encapsulates the implied narrative—not explaining the presence of 
the winged man and lion on the urban bridge, for Magritte’s titles 
notoriously fail to explain, but providing us with a narrative link. Like- 
wise, representations of the fantastic in dance or mime are nearly always 
accompanied by verbal texts—if only a printed program—to identify 
actors and explain events. A danced version of “Sleeping Beauty” relies on 


6 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


our familiarity with written or oral recountings to supply continuity and 
motivations. 

Storytelling itself, of course, usually relies on the properties of lan- 
guage. Language can refer to absent objects, designate different layers of 
time and represent transitions between them, evoke memories of sensory 
experience, and provoke emotional reactions. The fantastic strain of story- 
telling is particularly dependent upon the open-endedness of language: 
the fact that there are always more sentences available to the native 
speaker than there are situations to call for them. Thus we can, with even 
the most elementary vocabulary and grammar, name objects that we have 
never seen, like Tolkien’s green sun. Furthermore, we can narrate events 
that never happened, and do so in the past tense of historical assertion, 
rather than in the future tense or subjunctive mood. If we wished to define 
it linguistically, we might say that the fantastic is the use of the verb forms 
of reporting for events that in ordinary discourse would require more 
conditional forms. Rather than saying, “If only I had wings,” the fantastic 
asserts that I do. 

But the existence of danced or painted fantasy indicates that the 
fantastic mode, even when it makes use of language, is also relying on 
some larger structural organization. Language is a system of arbitrary 
signs, that is, of sounds or printed shapes, that refer to something else. If, 
as some linguistic philosophers have claimed, those signs could refer to 
rothing but other equally arbitrary signs, then fantasy would be impossi- 

‘e, for there would be no choosing between sentences on the basis of 

eir possibility or impossibility. But while individual letters or phonemes 

‘e signs in this limited sense, when assembled into words they begin to 
-onvey meaning outside of the arbitrary system. It is an arbitrary choice to 
call a cow a cow and not a lilac, but once that choice is made, I will not be 
understood if I announce that I am going to go milk the lilacs. At the next 
level of complexity, the sentence, language can actually begin to resemble 
its referent, not in its parts but in their articulation. Only at this level can 
language be said to represent, like a painting, or to move, like a dance. 

Out of groupings of sentences, descriptive and narrative, a storyteller 
generates the larger systems that we call “characters” or “events” or 
“settings.” Unlike the words from which they are made, these stand in 
relationship to the extraliterary world not as ordinary signs but as what 
Charles Sanders Peirce called icons. By this he meant that the sign is 
recognizably modeled after its referent—provided we understand the 
conventions of abstraction at work—in such a way that study and manip- 
ulation of the icon can lead to new understanding of the experience to 
which it relates (Peirce 2:158; { 2.279). One example of an icon is a map 
of an unknown city, which resembles the city itself sufficiently closely to 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 7 


prevent your getting lost. Even if it is of your own home town, the map 
may, by virtue of its abstraction from the original, lead you to a new 
understanding of traffic patterns or the dynamics of neighborhood 
growth. 

To bring this back to the subject of the fantastic, the impossible 
combinations of object and attribute or agent and action that characterize 
fantasy may refer only to their own self-contradiction. They need not 
convey any meaning beyond our recognition, based on experience or on 
cultural indoctrination, that those elements indeed do not belong to- 
gether: that the sea is not boiling hot, that pigs do not have wings. Yet 
most writers of fantasy have been drawn to combinations that are more 
than mere paradox or absurdity. Fantastic literature is full of “loaded” 
images, concrete emblems of problematic or valuable psychological and 
social phenomena. The combination of such images into a narrative order 
is an attempt to achieve iconic representation, so that the narrative can, 
like the city map, give us new insight into the phenomena it makes 
reference to. 

Sometimes, iconic signs can be modeled on originals that we do not 
have direct experience or conscious knowledge of. For example, Freud 
alerted us to the fact that dreams may contain icons of the unconscious 
mind. For this reason, fantastic literature frequently refers to or imitates 
dreaming. Dreams, like fantastic stories, often present impossible situs 
tions and nonexistent entities that we find mysteriously meaningft 
Whatever function we believe dreams serve—wish fulfillment, symbol 
confrontation with repressed memories, the unleashing of racial memo 
ries, or guidance toward psychic growth—fantastic literature is frequently 
designed to serve the same ends. The now outmoded convention of a 
dream framework for fantasy, as in George MacDonald’s Phantastes or 
Carroll’s Alice books, was probably intended not to undercut the cred- 
ibility of the stories but to reinforce their ties to the powerful experience of 
dreaming. 

Dream, daydream, hallucination, and visionary states have all pro- 
vided guidance for writers of fantasy. Michael Clifton argues that the 
imagery of fantasy reveals its kinship with altered states of consciousness 
such as hypnosis, meditation, and drug-induced vision (98). Frequently 
occurring in fantasy are scenes reminiscent of the hypnagogic state, that 
period of soaring sensations and fleeting visions often experienced just 
before one falls asleep. Indeed, many fantasy writers describe the com- 
position process as the cultivation of such states, in which the mind 
generates vivid and unexpected scenes which can then be assembled into 
narratives. C. S. Lewis, for instance, testifies that “All my seven Narnian 
books, and my three science fiction books, began with seeing pictures in 


8 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


my head. At first they were not a story, just pictures” (“It All Began with a 
Picture,” Of Other Worlds 42). 

Thus, even the freest fantasy is in a sense mimetic, for it depicts the 
associational processes of the unconscious, processes which seem to be 
most accessible when the rational censor is lulled to sleep and fidelity to 
surface reality is abandoned. 

Some of the iconic signs in fantasy are derived from a single author’s 
dreams or visions. However, the fantastic is not limited to insights into the 
individual psyche. The first fantastic literature was collective, its symbols 
shared by entire cultures. The motifs of traditional oral narratives, though 
probably the product of individual storytellers’ imaginations, were se- 
lected, altered, and recombined by generations of retellers, each of whom 
was faced with the necessity of pleasing a live audience. Thus the stories 
came to represent the desires and perceptions of the group, though the 
group may not have been consciously aware that it so perceived and 
desired. Myths, supernatural legends and ballads, magical folktales—all 
these express a group interaction that is difficult to describe without 
making analogies to the individual mind. Hence Jung speaks of the 
collective unconscious, as if humankind shared a single psyche. Fredric 
Jameson speaks of the political unconscious, and a nation accordingly lies 
down together on the analyst’s couch. The political or collective uncon- 
fcious may be the product of instinct, or racial memory, or merely of 

red experience; it may exist encoded in our brains or may exist only 

‘in the texts themselves. Jt is in any case a powerful force for social 

esiveness and group action, as evidenced by the successful manipula- 

1 of mythic narratives by political leaders, evangelists, and advertisers. 

Within print-oriented cultures, no mechanism exists for producing 
such pure expressions of group identity, though the popular media can 
occasionally produce images that approach the iconic status of traditional 
myths. However, writers can incorporate structures and motifs from the 
recorded texts of oral cultures. They can relocate the Odyssey in Ireland 
or in outer space; they can superimpose Odin or Anansi or Coyote on an 
otherwise mimetically conceived character; they can tell tales of three 
wishes or three princes or the three realms of the universe. Insofar as the 
writer can imaginatively recapture the original impulse of a myth, she 
becomes an honorary member of the tribe from which it emerged. 

Nearly all modern fantasy has made such raids on the recorded 
inventory of traditional narratives. Indeed, some accounts are probably 
overdrawn, such as Arthurian legend and romance. Reliance on tradi- 
tional motifs can be an easy way to make sure that the reader will respond 
to the fantastic. The writer taps the Merlin reflex and watches the reader 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 9 


jump. A few recent fantasies indicate, nonetheless, that not all traditions 
have been so thoroughly mined, nor have all ways of linking them to the 
writer’s own culture and experience been exhausted. 

Realistic fiction is similarly dependent on the devices of past story- 
tellers, but fantasy is less able to disguise its dependence. It cannot 
pretend to be unmediated reporting. It cannot be validated by our sense of 
the realistic, and even though that sense is also determined, to a great 
extent, by literary convention, we do not perceive the conventions that 
carve out particular genres and formulas from the mode of realism. If 
mimesis were not at least partly a matter of convention, there would not be 
so many rival realisms: social versus psychological, naturalist versus 
impressionist, stream-of-consciousness versus pseudo-dramatic presenta- 
tion, minimalist versus the highly circumstantial. 

However, the vast, unformed realm of the fantastic is limited not only 
by convention but also by a desire for iconic significance. The freedom it 
offers is offset by the need to be understood, and that means channeling 
the fantastic imagination through the psychological and social codes 
revealed in individual dreams and in collective mythology. Because the 
writer desires to connect with the reader, she submits to such restrictions 
and produces a more or less orderly and comprehensible narrative. She 
trades away a measure of freedom in exchange for the possibility of 
meaning. 

Some writers seem to be so intimidated by the potential anarchy of the 
fantastic, so eager for a guaranteed response, that they retreat to the 
opposite extreme, which results in the predictability of formula. Borrow- 
ing from Tolkien and from Disney, they have produced a rigid pattern of 
setting, character, and plot comparable to the formulas for the detective 
novel, the Western, and the women’s romance. Like these other popular 
forms, the fantasy formula, sometimes called swords-and-sorcery, can be 
used to generate lively, ingenious, highly entertaining variations on a 
limited theme. Like them, it represents “a synthesis of cultural symbols, 
themes, and myths with more universal story archetypes” (Cawelti 33) 
and hence may be analyzed to reveal widespread cultural values and 
assumptions. 

One appeal of formula fiction is that it can constitute a sort of game or 
pastime. The skilled author, an Agatha Christie or a Mary Stewart, plays 
by the rules but finds the loopholes in them. It is not the literariness of a 
formula story that determines its success but the degree to which it makes 
the predictable seem fresh and unexpected. 

Formula fantasy can be very predictable indeed. It has even spun off a 
do-it-yourself variation in the fantasy role-playing game. In such games, 





10 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


players follow a sort of recipe for collaboratively “writing” fantasy stories, 
sometimes through words alone, and sometimes with the aid of props and 
costumes. The recipe is roughly as follows, for either a game or a book: 


Take a vaguely medieval world. Add a problem, something more or less 
ecological, and a prophecy for solving it. 

Introduce one villain with no particular characteristics except a nearly 
all-powerful badness. Give him or her a convenient blind spot. 

Pour in enough mythological creatures and nonhuman races to fll out 
a number of secondary episodes: fighting a dragon, riding a winged horse, 
stopping overnight with the elves (who really should organize themselves 
into a bed-and-breakfast associatton). 

To the above mixture add one naive and ordinary hero who will prove 
to be the prophesied savior; give him a comic sidekick and a wise old 
advisor who can rescue him from time to time and explain the plot. 

Keep stirring until the whole thing congeals. 


Yet to say that a book follows a formula is not to say that it is 
necessarily bad. A poor non-formulaic story may be far worse than a 
good performance of the formula. Nor is there a clear division between 
the swords-and-sorcery formula and other uses of the fantastic. Every 
element of the formula may be present in a tale of sparkling originality. 
For some writers, narrative constraints seem to act as spurs to the imag- 
ination. Like the rules of grammar, such limitations enable invention even 
while restricting it. The fact that some fantasists do remake the language 
as they speak it, that they follow conventions but not slavishly, is my 

timary justification for looking for a middle ground between mode and 
rmula. This middle ground is the genre of fantasy. 

The history of the fantasy genre may be viewed as the story of the 
mposition of one particular set of restrictions on the mode of the fan- 
tastic. Modern fantasy begins at the end of the eighteenth century with the 
first German Kunstmarchen, literary imitations of the folktales popu- 
larized by Musaeus and the brothers Grimm. Adoption of the mood and 
setting of the folk Marchen was the first such narrowing of possibilities. 
Each fantasy writer thereafter has reshaped the genre by demonstrating 
the usefulness of further restrictions. George MacDonald helped to popu- 
larize a certain type of hero. William Morris introduced a distinctive 
vocabulary and style. Lord Dunsany set a fashion in naming places and 
characters. Tolkien showed that a particular structure worked well. Para- 
doxically, the more restricted the genre has become, the more productive 
it is of new texts. As the rules grow more definitive, the game becomes 
easier for the novice, and, at the same time, more challenging for the 
expert, the artist who wishes to redefine the game even as she plays it. 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 11 


The genre poses the continual temptation to accept as formula some 
prior fantasist’s contributions, using them as a shortcut in the painstaking 
process of inventing a fantasy world. A writer who knows the techniques 
of the oral narrator thirdhand, not even in the fossilized form of tran- 
scribed and edited texts but only as they have been utilized by Tolkien or 
Lewis or Le Guin, will find it difficult to produce anything but formula. 
The marketplace, too, tends to push fantasy toward formula. Few fan- 
tasists are supported by the system of university patronage by which we 
often recognize “serious” writers. Nor are their books generally published 
by prestigious hardcover houses and university presses. Instead, dis- 
tinctive and original novels by Nancy Willard or Paul Hazel appear in 
identical format and on the same supermarket shelves as the feeblest 
swords-and-sorcery. Even more problematical, a new writer will often fall 
somewhere in between these two extremes, producing a first novel that 
neither remakes the genre nor falls wholly into imitation, and only 
subsequent efforts reveal whether he will settle for marketable mediocrity 
Or mature as an artist. One of the redeeming features of formula fiction is 
that it may serve as an apprenticeship for the literary artist: just as 
Dorothy Sayers could not have written Gaudy Night without first working 
her way through the early Peter Wimsey mysteries, so would Alan Garner 
have been unlikely to achieve The Owl Service (1967) if he had not gained 
skill and confidence (and an audience) with his apprentice fantasies. 

My division of fantasy into formula and genre is therefore a somewhat 
artificial one. Yet the genre category does seem to be a useful way of 
designating stories that are more alike than required by the mode, and yet 
less uniform than dictated by the formula. Some notion of genre 1s needed 
to explain just how Garner’s mature work differs from his earlier attempts 
and to show that it is not because both contain dragons that A Wizard of 
Earthsea (1968) bears comparison with The Lord of the Rings. 

Critics disagree over whether genres should be defined systematically 
or descriptively, as logical possibilities or as historical facts. Both ap- 
proaches pose the danger of tempting one to believe too strongly in one’s 
own categories, and so genre criticism is rife with boundary disputes and 
definition wars. Still, by grouping similar texts together to see how they 
resemble one another and how far they may diverge without calling for a 
new category, we can begin to identify the pattern of expectations that 
allowed them to be written, that their authors drew upon and strained 
against to produce something unique and yet comprehensible. 

The rest of this book is, in a sense, my attempt to define the fantasy 
genre. I will use the term fantasy henceforth for the genre, letting fantastic 
designate the mode: this usage is consistent with a number of critical 
works on the subject. For instance, modal approaches include Eric 


2 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Rabkin’s The Fantastic in Literature (1976) and Christine Brooke-Rose’s 
A Rhetoric of the Unreal: Studies in Narrative and Structure, Especially 
of the Fantastic (1981), while generic studies include C. N. Manlove’s 
Modern Fantasy (1975), Stephen Prickett’s Victorian Fantasy (1979), 
John H. Timmerman’s Other Worlds: The Fantasy Genre (1983), and 
my own The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature (1980). 

Nearly every critical text in the field has proposed its own definitions 
for fantasy and the fantastic. Many of these are grouped conveniently in 
Gary K. Wolfe’s Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy (1986). 
Virtually all the definitions offered are descriptions after the fact; that is, 
the critic assembles a body of texts that seem somehow to fit the term and 
then describes the common feature or features. Literary theorists find this 
procedure messy, since neither the grouping nor the description is arrived 
at dialectically. Yet in practice, this method of defining is true to the 
process of categorization within the human mind. 

We often think of genres, like other categories, as territories on a map, 
with definitional limits marking off hard-boiled from classic detective, or 
fantasy from science fiction. The critic looks the candidate over, consults 
his list of characteristics, and assigns the book to the Allied Zone of 
fantasy or the Soviet Zone of SF, ignoring its ties to cousins on the other 
side of the wall. 

But another model proposed by logicians offers a more flexible means 
of categorization. Genres may be approached as “fuzzy sets,” meaning 
that they are defined not by boundaries but by a center. As described by 
George Lakoff and Mark Johnson, fuzzy set theory proposes that a 
category such as “bird” consists of central, prototypical examples like 
“robin,” surrounded at greater or lesser distance by more problematic 
instances such as “ostrich,” “chicken,” “penguin,” and even “bat” (122— 
24). These latter members of the set are described in ordinary language by 
various hedging terms: they are “technically birds,” “birds, loosely speak- 
ing,” or even “birdlike.” A chicken can be a bird to some degree, in some 
contexts, for some purposes, and be something entirely different, like 
“farmyard animal,” for other purposes. Conversely, an insect may be 
birdlike enough to warrant a name like “hummingbird moth” or 
“ladybird”; the name expresses a perceived grouping. 

Just so, a book may be a classic murder mystery, like Dorothy Sayers’s 
Strong Poison, or more or less a mystery, like her Gaudy Night, or 
somewhat of a mystery, like Mark Twain’s Pudd’nbead Wilson, or similar 
to a mystery in some respects, like Crime and Punishment. The category 
has a clear center but boundaries that shade off imperceptibly, so that a 
book on the fringes may be considered as belonging or not, depending on 
one’s interests. Is Oedipus a mystery? 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 13 


Furthermore, there may be no single quality that links an entire set: 


A beanbag chair may resemble a prototypical chair in a different way than 
a barber chair does. There need be xo fixed core of properties of pro- 
totypical chairs that are shared by both beanbag and barber chairs. Yet 
they are both chairs because each, in its different way, is sufficiently close 
to the prototype. (Lakoff and Johnson 123) 


In dealing with genre, it is our, or at least the writers’, perceptions of 
category that create the members of the set itself. Hence the importance of 
precursors: the stories of Dupin, Holmes, Sam Spade, and Miss Marple 
are the “robins” of our fuzzy set of mysteries—or sets, for a viable diver- 
gence from type may generate the perception of a new set, as hard-boiled 
emerged from classic detective stories. 

Is fantasy a fuzzy set? From what center do we perceive it radiating? 
Not entirely trusting my own perceptions, | arranged an unscientific 
experiment to test them. Calling on acquaintances who have written 
scholarship on fantastic literature, I produced a list of forty titles and 
asked them to rank those titles on a scale of one to seven. A score of one 
described the work as quintessentially fantasy; a two said that it is 
basically fantasy; three was technically; fcur, in some respects; five, the 
work is like fantasy; six, it is not really; and seven, by no means fantasy. 
Then they were to do the same thing, using the same titles and scale, for 
the category “science fiction,” a genre with close historical and con- 
ventional ties to fantasy. 

The titles included novels published as fantasy, as science fiction, and 
as (the term is inexact and probably indefinable, but publishers and book 
reviewers seem to know what it is) mainstream fiction. Ray Bradbury was 
on the list, and so were Aldous Huxley, Joanna Russ, Mark Twain (A 
Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court), Mary Shelley (Franken- 
stein), Gabriel Garcia Marquez (One Hundred Years of Solitude), Ber- 
nard Malamud (The Natural), Heinlein, Asimov, Lewis, Tolkien, and Le 
Guin. My small sampling (14 responses, including my own), my inexact 
scale of qualifiers, and my highly idiosyncratic list of titles no doubt 
invalidate any results from a statistical perspective, but I did find some 
striking patterns. 

First, there are, as I expected, no clear boundaries between categories. 
Fantasy edges into science fiction; science fiction impinges on mainstream 
fiction; mainstream fiction overlaps with fantasy. Second, certain titles 
clearly occupy a more central place in people’s conception of the genre. 
For fantasy, five titles ranked between one and two on average, that is, 
were considered to be basically or quintessentially fantasy by my corre- 


14 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


spondents. The lower the score, the more central. Dracula came in with a 
1.76; Roger Zelazny’s Amber series and E. R. Eddison’s The Worm 
Ouroboros tied at 1.5; Alice in Wonderland was even closer to the 
quintessential fantasy at 1.42; Le Guin’s Earthsea trilogy scored 1.3; and 
with a 1.07 representing near unanimity, The Lord of the Rings stands in 
the bullseye. 

So what? I have already admitted that this little exercise has no 
scientific validity. However, it does reinforce my own impression that with 
the publication and popular acceptance of Tolkien’s version of the fan- 
tastic, a new coherence was given to the genre. His was not the first 
modern fantasy: one might look behind him to the Edwardians—Edith 
Nesbit, Kenneth Grahame, and Rudyard Kipling—and before them to the 
Victorians—Carroll, Dickens, John Ruskin, Mrs. (Mary L.) Molesworth, 
Mrs. (Juliana Horatia) Ewing, William Morris, Charles Kingsley, and 
George MacDonald. His may not be the best fantasy: David Lindsay’s 
might be viewed as more inventive, Mervyn Peake’s more vivid, Ursula Le 
Guin’s more intense, John Crowley’s more intricate. But Tolkien is most 
typical, not just because of the imaginative scope and commitment with 
which he invested his tale but also, and chiefly, because of the immense 
popularity that resulted. When The Lord of the Rings appeared, we had a 
core around which to group a number of storytellers who had hitherto 
been simply, as Northrop Frye suggests, “other writers” belonging to no 
identified category or tradition (The Secular Scripture 42). 

Tolkien’s form of fantasy, for readers in English, is our mental tem- 
plate, and will be until someone else achieves equal recognition with an 
alternative conception. One way to characterize the genre of fantasy is the 
set of texts that in some way or other resemble The Lord of the Rings. 

It is possible to be more precise than that. Simply looking at Tolkien’s 
text itself, one would not be able to guess which of its features have 
become dominant in modern fantasy. Do other fantasies echo or antici- 
pate his imagery of stars and jewels, his use of interpolated songs and tales, 
his invention of multiple languages, his borrowings from Celtic and 
Finnish folklore? None of these turns out to be particularly common 
among non-formulaic fantasies. Instead, the works we recognize as fan- 
tasy tend to resemble The Lord of the Rings in three more fundamental 
ways. One of these has to do with content, another with structure, and the 
third with reader response. 

The essential content is the impossible, or, as I put it in The Fantasy 
Tradition in American Literature, “some violation of what the author 
clearly believes to be natural law” (17). Others define the impossible 
slightly differently—Kathryn Hume refers to “departure from consensus 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 15 


reality” (8), C. N. Manlove mentions the supernatural, Jane Mobley calls 
it magic—but there is general agreement that some such violation is 
essential to fantasy. The broader field of the fantastic may include the 
improbable, the implausible, the highly unlikely, and the as-yet-nonexis- 
tent. But fantasy, as it has crystallized around central works like The Lord 
of the Rings, demands a sharper break with reality. 

Second, the characteristic structure of fantasy is comic. It begins with 
a problem and ends with resolution. Death, despair, horror, and betrayal 
may enter into a fantasy, but they must not be the final word. Much 
fantasy does not have what we could call a “happy ending.” Indeed, the 
fantasist often seems to start with the idea of such a resolution and then to 
qualify it, finding every hidden cost in the victory. Le Guin’s Ged pays a 
price in each of the three volumes of her Earthsea trilogy: first his pride, 
then his self-sufficiency, and finally his powers and nearly his life. Sim- 
ilarly, Frodo is rewarded, at the end of The Lord of the Rings, with pain 
and exile, while Sam faces a diminished world bereft of elven magic. But 
in each case the problem initially posed by the narrative has been solved, 
the task successfully completed. If it were otherwise, if, for instance, the 
Ring were simply hidden again or fallen, despite the heroes’ best efforts, 
into the hands of the Enemy, then we would not have the structural 
completeness of fantasy, but the truncated story-forms of absurdism or 
horror. 

The structure of The Lord of the Rings is that of the traditional fairy 
tale. It conforms to the morphology described by Vladimir Propp: a 
round-trip journey to the marvelous, complete with testing of the hero, 
crossing of a threshold, supernatural assistance, confrontation, flight, and 
establishment of a new order at home. In a fiction that claimed to be 
based on life, such invariable resolution might be accused of naiveté, but 
as a deliberate choice of form in a manifestly unreal setting, it says more 
about the ways we seek for order than about our expectations of finding it 
in the real world. 

Tolkien himself believed that such an upward movement is inextricably 
connected with the fantastic; every complete fairy story, he said, that is, 
every fantasy with an intact structure, must have such a final turn toward 
deliverance, for which he proposed the term “eucatastrophe” (“On Fairy- 
Stories” 68). For Tolkien, this term has religious implications, but non- 
Christian writers such as Le Guin have made effective use of the same 
structural principle. 

This eucatastrophe is essential in producing the effect in the reader 
that is the third commonly shared property of fantasy. Tolkien calls this 
effect joy or consolation, but he does not mean by these terms that it is a 


16 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


simple emotional payoff. What the reader experiences in a fantasy is not 
the same satisfaction that results from getting a Jane Austen heroine 
married or finding treasure for Jim Hawkins. 

A better word might be “wonder.” C. N. Manlove makes this a part of 
his definition for fantasy: “a fiction evoking wonder and containing a 
substantial and irreducible element of supernatural or impossible worlds, 
beings or objects with which the mortal characters in the story or the 
readers become on at least partly familiar terms” (Modern Fantasy 1). 
Manlove rightly connects wonder with the “contemplation of . . . strange- 
ness” (Modern Fantasy 7); in other words, it has as much to do with ways 
of seeing as with emotional response. 

The concept of wonder, as a key to fantasy’s impact, may best be 
understood as an alternative formulation of the idea of estrangement. This 
term has come into English-language critical discourse from two sources: 
Viktor Shklovsky’s ostranenie, translated as “defamiliarization,” and Ber- 
tolt Brecht’s Verfremdung, which may mean “alienation” (Gary K. Wolfe, 
Critical Terms 31-32). Shklovsky saw estrangement as the essential! 
operation of all literature: through the formal manipulation of their 
linguistic representatives we are made to see familiar objects and experi- 
ences as strange, distant from ourselves. Ultimately, then, literature draws 
us away from the world we live in—or think we live in, for in Shklovsky 
and Brecht’s Marxist view, the initial familiarity was an illusion produced 
by the mystifications of bourgeois ideology and hence must be replaced by 
estrangement as a preliminary step toward social revolution. 

Tolkien, a Catholic, also saw the necessity of penetrating illusion. 
However, for him, such illusion was not politico-economic in origin but 
was produced by boredom, habit, false sophistication, and loss of faith. 
The illusion is that the world has become trite or stale. To dispel (or dis- 
spell) it, it is necessary to see things in new ways, but rather than making 
familiar objects seem disconcerting or alien, he thought fantasy could 
restore them to the vividness with which we first saw them. He called the 
process “recovery” (“On Fairy-Stories” 57). 

In order to recover our sense of something like a tree, it is only 
necessary to envision a dragon curled around its trunk. Or perhaps 
merely envisioning is not enough. Tree and dragon must be drawn into a 
comprehensible pattern, which for human beings means a story. We must 
know, too, that our fictional representatives will survive their encounter 
with the dragon and gain new understanding thereby. Tolkien’s brand of 
recovery requires the combination of the familiar and the impossible 
within the context of an affirming, reordering narrative. 

And that is our definition of the genre of fantasy if we take Tolkien as 
our prototype. It is a form that makes use of both the fantastic mode, to 


Fantasy as Mode, Genre, Formula 17 


produce the impossibilities, and the mimetic, to reproduce the familiar. 
The conventions of swords-and-sorcery are not part of the definition: the 
genre can include stories without hobbits or rings of power or evil 
magicians. Fantasy does impose many restrictions on the powers of the 
imagination, but in return it offers the possibility of generating not merely 
a meaning but an awareness of and a pattern for meaningfulness. This we 
call wonder. 

In the next chapter I will backtrack to uncover some of the theoretical 
propositions underlying the definitions I have just offered for fantasy and 
the fantastic. My test case wil] be, not surprisingly, Tolkien’s major 
fantasy, The Lord of the Rings; but I will not be dealing closely with the 
text itself, which I assume to be familiar to virtually anyone interested 
enough to have read this far. Instead, I will be looking at the treatment of 
this prototypical fantasy by representatives of several schools of critical 
thought. I will be assuming—based on my own and others’ reported 
experience—that Tolkien’s story is capable of shifting our perceptions in 
such a way as to generate wonder, though | do not claim it does so 
consistently or for all readers. Accordingly, I assert that the task of literary 
theory is to provide a framework capable of accounting for the story’s 
success on its own terms, rather than denying that its aims are achievable 
or worth the attempt. 


| 


TWO 


Is Fantasy Literatures 


TOLKIEN AND THE THEORISTS 


IN 1968, WHEN NEIL ISAACS AND ROSE ZIMBARDO assembled their first 
collection of essays on J. R. R. Tolkien, virtually nothing in the way of 
heory had been proposed for the examination of fantasy. Tolkien himself 
\ad made a start, with his essays on Beowulf and on fairy stories, but few 
ooked past his figurative language and religious orientation to see the 
underlying radicalism of his thoughts on narrative. Accordingly, the crit- 
ics in Tolkien and the Critics (1968) were limited in their discussions of 
The Lord of the Rings. They could describe and quote; make analogies 
with works in other modes; seek for literary ancestors; pursue themes; 
evaluate characters and the values they seemed to embody; and discuss 
Stylistic strengths and weaknesses. For the most part they accomplished 
those tasks with insight and clarity, especially considering the extravagant 
partisanship of both pro- and anti-Tolkienians at the time. Yet throughout 
the discussions of these perceptive readers—their ranks included Roger 
Sale, C. S. Lewis, W. H. Auden, and others less well known but equally 
astute—one senses that they are struggling to affirm the excellence of 
Tolkien’s text against the weight of a received tradition of critical thought. 
The critics were often forced to emphasize elements that conform to 
standard literary theory, even though those elements may not be charac- 
teristic of Tolkien’s story as a whole: an ambiguous character here, a 
manipulation of point of view there, a striking verbal coinage, an allusion, 
a bit of irony; anything that might compare to the acknowledged values of 


18 


SS =< lll ee CC LL a ee 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 1g 


fiction in the tradition of James or Conrad or Joyce. One is reminded of 
defenses of Picasso based on the fact that “he really could draw when he 
wanted to.” 

The most revealing article in the collection is Burton Raffel’s “The 
Lord of the Rings as Literature,” in which Raffel, who admired the work, 
was forced to conclude that it was, even so, not literature. It did not fit the 
criteria he had in mind: style, characterization, and incident. Not just any 
sort of style, characterization, and incident, for The Lord of the Rings 
(henceforth LOTR) certainly has a style, does present characters and 
incidents, but the sort of style that calls attention to its own innovations 
after the fashion of poetry, the sort of characterization that portrays 
“significant aspects of human reality” (232), and the sort of incident that 
seems to occur of its own necessity, rather than according to the dictates of 
an overall plot. By these standards, LOTR is certainly not literature; 
Tolkien’s bumblebee obviously cannot fly. And yet it does fly, as Raffel 
admits: “Tolkien’s three volumes tell an entrancing ‘good and evil story’ 
and tell it with power and wisdom; he has succeeded in constructing a 
self-contained world of extraordinary reality—and grace” (218). Despite 
all this, “making stories, even wonderful stories, is not the same as 
making literature” (219). 

Raffel is convincing. We must either redefine literature or exclude 
Tolkien—and with him much of modern fantasy. If it is true (as I believe) 
that all the closely observed characters and finely tuned prose in the world 
won’t make a dull story readable, and that to judge from the relative rates 
of success and failure in existing fiction, spinning wonderful stories is the 
rarest and most difficult of literary skills, then we need a new definition of 
narrative literature, and such a theory must be able to account for the 
felicities as well as the obvious failings of a work like LOTR. 

Any theory of narrative that could explain what is going on in 
Tolkien’s epic would also force a reexamination of other stories, both 
fantastic and nonfantastic. Common assumptions about how narrative is 
organized, what its building blocks are, and how it relates to the world of 
extraliterary experience all prove inadequate to explain fantasy, insofar as 
LOTR typifies the genre. Even so, if we can begin to explain how fantasy 
operates, we may find that other kinds of fiction operate in some of the 
same ways, but on a level usually concealed by surface circumstantiality. 

In the last two decades, narrative technique, formerly taken at face 
value or neglected in favor of fiction’s dramatic and stylistic elements, has 
finally come under systematic scrutiny within the Anglo-American critical 
community. There seem to be two main reasons for this shift of attention 
toward narrative. One is the increasing availability of English translations 
of pioneering explorations by Russian and French scholars such as 





20 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Vladimir Propp, Viktor Shklovsky, Mikhail Bakhtin, Claude Lévi-Strauss, 
Gérard Genette, Roland Barthes, and Tzvetan Todorov, all of whom share 
an interest in the ways narrative is structured and how those structures 
carry significance. The belated discovery of this group, whose writings in 
their own languages actually span several decades, produced such excite- 
ment as to overshadow, for a time, efforts made by theorists writing in 
English, such as Northrop Frye and Wayne Booth. 

The other reason for a new interest in narrative organization was the 
appearance of a new kind of narrative which violated conventional nar- 
rative codes. Generalizations about what literature is and does, which may 
have been adequate to explain everything from Jane Austen to William 
Faulkner, broke down when it came to Borges’s “Pierre Menard, Author 
of the Quixote” (1962) or Calvino’s The Castle of Crossed Destinies 
(1977). 

And so a host of new theoretical terms gained currency as tools for 
analyzing the new fiction and unearthing hidden patterns within the old. 
Many, perhaps most, of the postmodernist texts that had called for new 
terms of analysis were fantastic, and so, not surprisingly, scholars have 
begun applying contemporary theory both to the mode of the fantastic 
and to the genre of fantasy, even to Tolkien’s genre-crystallizing tale. Thus 
we come to the central question behind this chapter: how has The Lord of 
the Rings fared in the hands of theorists, and what have they had to say 
that was not covered by earlier critics? 

Few of the Continental theory-builders have looked directly at the 
nre of fantasy. Propp worked with the traditional fairy tale, a primary 
urce for the modern fantasy tradition, and so his “morphology” is a 
emendously useful mode of analysis for fantasy, but Propp himself does 

not trace the borrowing of the fairy tale pattern by literary artists. Todorov 
has confused matters greatly in The Fantastic (1975), which has almost no 
bearing on the kind of fantasy we are discussing here—a product of 
diverging meanings for the word fantastic in French and English. “La 
litterature fantastique” is an entirely different genre, confined almost 
exclusively to the nineteenth century and represented in English by such 
texts as Henry James’s “The Turn of the Screw.” 

Direct application of contemporary theory to LOTR has been largely 
the work of second-generation theorists. One example is Rosemary Jack- 
son, in Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion (1981). Jackson comes to 
fantasy formidably armed with theoretical weapons, primarily Freudi- 
anism, Marxism, and structuralism, not in their original, blunt-instru- 
ment forms but as revised and refined by Jacques Lacan, Julia Kristeva, 
Louis Althusser, Fredric Jameson, Jonathan Culler, and other major con- 
temporary proponents. Starting from this base, Jackson proposes, first, 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists Zi 


that fantasy is fundamentally a literature of desire and, second, that its 
ventures into the nonexistent are really ways of challenging the existing 
political, social, and economic order. These two propositions are more 
closely connected than it might appear. According to Jackson, desire is 
not a simple psychological drive, but the tension produced by the social 
inhibition of such drives: “a lack resulting from cultural constraints” (3). 
Hence, a literature of desire is of necessity a literature, as her subtitle 
indicates, of subversion. When fantasy describes the impossible, Jackson 
says, it is really manifesting the forbidden. 

Jackson’s theory is compelling and proves fruitful in analyzing texts 
ranging from Kafka’s “Metamorphosis” to Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland. 
The trouble is, when she gets to the Tolkienian expression of the fantastic, 
she attempts to use her theory as a standard. The function of fantasy is to 
express desire in a subversive guise, she says, but Tolkien’s fantasy at- 
tempts to do something else. Rather than broadening her theory to fit the 
exception, she concludes that The Lord of the Rings is a failed fantasy, 
and along with it the works of Kingsley, MacDonald, Le Guin, and Lewis. 
Her comments on the genre converge curiously with those who condemn 
it from the perspective of mimetic theory: it evades reality. The reality she 
is speaking of is interior, rather than exterior, but the tone of her accusa- 
tion is the same: 


The moral and religious allegories, parables and fables informing the 
stories of Kingsley and Tolkien move away from the unsettling implications 
which are found at the centre of the purely “fantastic.” Their original 
impulse may be similar, but they move from it into religious longing and 
nostalgia. Thus they defuse potentially disturbing, antisocial drives and 
retreat from any profound confrontation with existential dis-ease [sic]. (9) 


Not only does Tolkien’s fiction represent a retreat, but the justification 
of his own practice he offered in “On Fairy-Stories” is “transcendentalist” 
and, accordingly, “sentimental,” “nostalgic,” the product of “an outworn 
liberal humanism” (153, 155). 

In looking at the story of LOTR, Jackson focuses on Tolkien’s por- 
trayal of social systems and finds that, despite his obvious dislike for 
twentieth-century industrial society, he can be faulted for “supporting a 
ruling ideology” (155). In other words, instead of criticizing the noise, 
pollution, dehumanization, destructiveness, and sheer ugliness of modern 
cities, which may be found in any social system, he should be attacking 
only those ills specific to capitalism. 

Jackson fails to make use of the theoretical tools at hand to offer any 
real insight into LOTR. She mentions that Tolkien sets up an aesthetic 
standard for morality—“virtue lies with a beautiful Elvish Speech, evil 





ZZ STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


with an ugly Black Speech” (156)— but fails to note that this equation is a 
rhetorical device to alert the reader to the presence of evil, not an attempt 
to define evil linguistically. She objects to Tolkien’s Medievalism on the 
grounds that he is evading the writer’s responsibility to represent his own 
age, forgetting that she has elsewhere claimed (rightly) that every text 
inevitably represents its own age. Tolkien’s Medieval world is not the 
historical Middle Ages any more than Pierre Menard’s Quixote is Cer- 
vantes’s. Jackson faults Tolkien’s use of such fairy tale elements as the 
impersonal narrator and the happy ending because they allow the reader 
to be passive: “The reader, like the protagonist, is merely a receiver of 
events which enact a preconceived pattern” (33). Yet Tolkien’s story surely 
requires as much active collaboration from the reader as any experimental 
novel, for it asks our continuous assent to what we know to be impossible, 
thereby altering the status of every assertion within the narrative. 

The instances of fantastic narrative Jackson praises are subversive 
because they confound our expectations. “They assert that what they are 
telling us is real—relying upon all the conventions of realistic fiction to do 
so—and then they proceed to break that assumption of realism by intro- 
ducing what—within those terms—is manifestly unreal” (34) Yet Tolkien- 
ian fantasy may be equally subversive, for it asserts that what it is telling us 
is unreal and then proceeds to break that assumption of unreality by 
drawing upon the conventions of realistic fiction. Why should the one 
technique be praiseworthy and the other subject to condemnation? 

The answer seems to be either that Jackson is not applying theories 

‘ith equal justice or that the theories themselves are inadequate to 
xplain what is going on. Like the theories of language that reduced 
speech to a matter of simple stimulus and response—and held sway for 
decades because they allowed no evidence other than the sort of observa- 
tion that confirmed their assumptions—these theories of narrative tend to 
reduce all texts to a few simple patterns, and those texts least amenable to 
such reduction are ranked lowest by the theoreticians. 

Yet even an uncongenial theory may bring insight if it is applied with 
sympathy. Jackson’s characterization of fantasy as a literature of desire is 
suggestive. Desire of all sorts is a key ingredient in LOTR: hunger, thirst, 
religious longing, greed for power, death wishes; desires fulfilled and 
unfulfilled, acknowledged and repressed. But Jackson offers only two 
operations that a narrative can perform with desires. It can either express 
or expel them. Thus, disturbing elements can overwhelm the narrative, in 
good or “radical” fantasies, or be thrust out of it, in bad or “sentimental” 
ones. 

In both cases, the desires are considered to be preexisting, the product 
of the clash between psyche and society. According to C. S. Lewis, 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 23 


however, fantasy illustrates a third operation that can be performed on 
desires: arousing them. A fantastic tale stirs longings that either did not 
exist previously or that the reader was not aware of: “It stirs and troubles 
him (to his life-long enrichment) with the dim sense of something beyond 
his reach and, far from dulling or emptying the actual world, gives it a new 
dimension of depth” (“On Three Ways of Writing for Children,” Of Other 
Worlds 30). 

Lewis’s language here, like Tolkien’s in “On Fairy-Stories,” reflects his 
religious orientation; however, this statement cannot be dismissed as 
“transcendental.” For Tolkien and Lewis, it is true, longing for the nonex- 
istent could be a preliminary to personal experience of the divine. Yet 
Lewis's formulation can be translated into purely materialistic terms and 
still remain valid. These new desires are most probably built from existing 
elements. Just as complex emotions like love are built from less lofty 
impulses, for example, the pairing instinct and the sexual drive, the 
Sebnsucht or longing engendered by fantasy has its roots in the various 
physical and emotional hungers we have all experienced from infancy. The 
dream of paradise is not a mere displacement of nostalgia for the womb, 
as Jackson suggests; however, it may develop from such an emotion by 
adding to it and restructuring it. Whatever its origins, such longing is an 
important component in the cognitive shift toward wonder engendered by 
successful fantasy. 

Jackson’s lack of sympathy with Tolkien and his ilk prevents her from 
seeing continuities between their fantasy and the work of the fantasists she 
admires, just as it causes her to undervalue Tolkien’s and Lewis's specula- 
tions on the nature of fantasy. She even goes so far as to cite the politically 
more correct W. H. Auden as a source for Tolkien’s ideas: “W. H. Auden’s 
Secondary Worlds influenced Tolkien’s formulation of secondary, autono- 
mous, imagined realms in Tree and Leaf” (182). The Auden essay she 
cites appeared in 1968; Tolkien’s “On Fairy- Stories” appeared as a lecture 
in 1938 and in print in 1947. 

Christine Brooke-Rose’s A Rhetoric of the Unreal (1981) adopts 
many of the same theoretical methodologies as Jackson’s study, but it is 
not so obviously partisan and so manages to find more of the pattern and 
purpose in Tolkien’s work. Brooke-Rose, herself a novelist in the self- 
reflexive fantastic manner, is interested in how the system of language is 
able to sustain secondary systems within it. These are the conventional 
rhetorics by which we seek to represent the world of experience and give it 
order and significance. 

A narrative rhetoric is a way of presenting information about charac- 
ters, setting, events, and so on, so as to determine the parameters of the 
reader’s response. A particular rhetorical choice will cause some elements 


24 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


within the story to be suppressed, others emphasized or even “overdeter- 
mined” through redundancy and other devices. Time sequence, for in- 
stance, may be indicated once by verb tense, again by adverbial markers, 
and yet again by characters commenting on it. Generally, overdetermina- 
tion of one element of a narrative is balanced by withholding of informa- 
tion in other areas. For example, Brooke-Rose points out that although 
Irving’s “Rip Van Winkle” belabors the fact of its time paradox—twenty 
years spent in a single night—it leaves symbolic implications almost 
entirely for the reader to supply from bare hints. Thus, she concludes, 


it is clear that over-determination in one area does not alter our feeling of 
something else being there, less immediately accessible, which gives the 
story its charm and quality (to use evaluative words), or (to avoid them) its 
underlying structure and coherence. (112) 


Another kind of rhetoric may overdetermine symbolic applications of the 
text while leaving other dimensions, such as physical environment, pur- 
posely vague. 

Brooke-Rose’s theory allows us to view the spectrum of narrative 
possibilities, from sober pseudo-history to fantastic adventures, as a 
choice of rule-bound activities, rather like meaningful games. Choose one 
game and your rules are set, by precedent and by expediency: some 
gambits demonstrably work better than others. Nevertheless, within a 
given rhetorical pattern, original discourse is possible. Rules may even be 
bent or borrowed from some other pattern. Most importantly, though 
Brooke-Rose does not say so, this theory implies that no one rhetoric is 
inherently preferable, though one story may be more successful than 
another. 

The rhetorics Brooke-Rose identifies include those of the realistic 
novel, science fiction, the folktale and its literary imitations, the playful 
text, and the ambiguous tale (Todorov’s “fantastic”). These categories 
converge and their various rhetorical systems likewise exhibit overlapping 
features. Realism shares with science fiction its insistence on a “mega- 
story”—a field of historical, geographic, or scientific information— 
against the backdrop of which the plot is enacted (86). In science fiction, 
of course, much of this megastory is invented by the storyteller and must 
be supplied surreptitiously as the story unfolds. 

The folktale and the ambiguous tale both present carefully interlock- 
ing actions, each the explanation for the next, but in the folktale every- 
thing fits together in the end, while in the ambiguous story we are left 
with two or more mutually contradictory patterns, like puzzle pieces that 
can fit together to make a triangle, a circle, and a star, but with a gap 
somewhere in each design. 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 25 


Brooke-Rose devotes a full chapter to The Lord of the Rings. The 
primary rhetoric here is that of the marvelous, for which she essentially 
adapts Propp’s morphology of the fairy tale. A tale of the marvelous 
proceeds by unfolding a series of structural elements, which Propp called 
“functions’—characters like the hero, the helper, and the opponent, or 
incidents like interdiction, crossing of the threshold, gaining of treasure, 
and return. Often these functions are doubled or tripled, a rhetorical 
device that emphasizes their status as parts of a pattern, a story, rather 
than mimetic renderings of real human beings and lives. The pattern they 
make is usually a quest. 

LOTR adopts the rhetoric of the marvelous in many respects, except 
that the quest is inverted: the adventurers seek to lose, rather than acquire, 
a valuable object. It also differs from most traditional uses of the mar- 
velous in the degree of reduplication of functions. Instead of one helper or 
“adjuvant,” there are eight, counting only those actually traveling with 
the hero. Several of these break off temporarily to serve as secondary 
heroes in subsidiary quests. 

Brooke-Rose gets impatient with Tolkien, finding the plot un- 
necessarily embroidered with secondary characters and false climaxes, 
but she has no theoretical basis for her complaint. Tolkien is certainly 
following the rhetorical rules of his chosen narrative form, albeit to an 
unprecedented degree. At most we can say that he has overdetermined the 
structural basis of the story. 

Another of Brooke-Rose’s objections to Tolkien’s handling of the 
marvelous is his use of a posteriori justification for the action. Why does 
Boromir attempt to wrest the ring from Frodo? In a traditional fairy tale 
we might not ask; it just happens that way. But Tolkien provides some 
possible answers—Boromir’s clouded heritage as the descendant of not- 
quite-kings, his city’s desperate need, his father’s growing despair, his 
proud and hasty temperament. Brooke-Rose finds these explanations 
unconvincing. The real reason for Boromir’s actions, she says, is that the 
plot demands them: 


his function is wholly to introduce dissension in the Company... , so 
that it can split, so that Frodo and Sam should be alone in the quest, so 
that the adventures may be separated. When that is achieved Boromir is 
got rid of (dies). (237; emphases in text) 


Any psychological justification for these actions is secondary to the nar- 
rative necessity that calls them forth. 

Organization by so that is another kind of overdetermination. It too is 
a feature of traditional fairy tales. Why does Cinderella’s mother die? So 
that her father can marry again, so that Cinderella may be mistreated by 


26 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


stepmother and stepsisters, so that her fairy godmother may intervene, and 
so on. Tolkien certainly does not attempt to conceal this rhetorical ele- 
ment. He even has characters whose primary function seems to be point- 
ing out so thats. Brooke-Rose refers to Gandalf as “the great explainer” 
(237), and Elrond, Aragorn, Faramir, and others play the same role on 
occasion. Though she does not follow up on the idea, her observation 
could lead to insight into the sources of Tolkien’s skill, for he evidently 
recognizes as part of the tale’s meaning the very fact that it is a constructed 
thing, and not a found object. 

Why does Brooke-Rose object to Tolkien’s use of the rhetoric of the 
marvelous in a tale of the marvelous? Because she is applying standards 
based on other rhetorical modes. Inadequately motivated action is a lapse, 
not in fantasy, but in the realistic novel, where we expect to be provided 
with enough character analysis to conceal the mechanical nature of the 
plot. Brooke-Rose objects to LOTR because it offers some of the features 
of realistic fiction, but not to the same degree we have come to expect. 
Boromir is assigned motives of pride and envy, but those motives are, in 
comparison with the psychologizing of a Henry James, transparent and 
static. In this mix of modes, “the obviousness belongs to the marvelous, 
the insistence to realism” (249). 

And that is Brooke-Rose’s great analytical insight, which is also her 
primary failing when she translates analysis into judgment. LOTR does 
nix modes. Its sense of vastness, of stories behind stories, of characters 

tho enter the story without being profoundly affected by it, who disap- 
ear into untold stories of their own; these impressions derive from 
folkien’s adaptation of the rhetoric of the real, rather than the unreal. At 
the same time, Tolkien makes use of fairy tale inevitability and of role- 
defined characters, like the many elves who seem to exist solely to “send 
messages, offer rest, cure, magical gifts, solemn welcomes, farewells and 
counsels. . .” (250). 

In Brooke-Rose’s view the mixture represents “the weakest feature of 
both the realistic and the marvelous combined . . .” (250). She finds that 
“the techniques of realism, when invading the marvelous, have a very 
curious effect. For they not only weigh down and flatten out the narrative 
like an iron, they actually change its genre, or come very near to doing so” 
(254). Again filtering out the negative evaluation, which is a matter of taste 
masquerading as analysis, we may borrow Brooke-Rose’s conclusion to 
help explain why LOTR remade the genre of fantasy. 

If we accept her description of Tolkien’s technique without agreeing 
that such a technique is necessarily problematic, we can see that the 
rhetoric of the realistic-marvelous can produce effects not available to 
either of the parent modes. It is, for instance, the probable source of 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 27 


LOTR’s curious resistance to allegorical readings, including that which 
Brooke-Rose tries to impose (254). Frodo, Saruman, the Ring remain 
stubbornly themselves—suggestive of, but not reducible to, components 
of twentieth-century life. Tolkien’s overdetermined rhetoric will not allow 
us to bypass the concrete instance and proceed directly to the moral 
application. 

Like Jackson, Brooke-Rose is unwilling to follow up the implications 
of her own methodology when it comes to Tolkien. Both writers seem 
incapable of paying close attention to the text, as shown by remarkable 
carelessness with detail. In A Rhetoric of the Unreal, Brooke-Rose turns 
Sam Gamgee’s name into the Hindu-sounding “Gamjee” (237), misspells 
the name of the dwarf Balin as “Belin” (244), states that “Gandalf, though 
a wizard, can only perform minor magic” (245), and refers to Arwen’s 
“brother Elrond” (252). Names and magic are important and related 
parts of the megatext of LOTR. These lapses suggest that she does not see 
the way Tolkien has structured the story so that megatext is as important 
as foreground narrative. His rhetorical strategy directs us to look for 
significance in the interrelationships of the two rather than either alone. 

These two examples of theoretical approaches to Tolkien indicate that 
the chosen theories are not being applied rigorously. There may also, 
however, be limitations in the theories themselves. The dominant literary 
theories from early Modernism to late Structuralism have rested on a 
triple base: Saussure, Marx, and Freud. These three giants of the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries attempted to treat human studies 
from a scientific perspective—Saussure applying to language, Marx to 
history, and Freud to psychology the methods of the natural sciences. By 
imitating the objective stance and descriptive technique of physics or 
biology, they hoped to clear away centuries of circular reasoning and 
unnecessary assumptions. Hence their importance to literary theorists 
who wish to be equally scientific. 

But large areas of human experience do not lend themselves to explo- 
ration through the methods of the physical or even the biological sciences. 
The German philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey offers a cogent critique of 
attempts to model human sciences after natural ones. He insisted that we 
cannot ignore the evidence of internal awareness, nor can we equate a lived 
experience with the sense perceptions from which it springs. Predictive 
models, too, falsify human experience by imposing a deterministic form of 
causation, omitting awareness and choice from the course of events (Mak- 
kreel 66). Trying to be scientific, Saussure reduced language to an arbi- 
trary self-referential pattern, Freud viewed the psyche exclusively in terms 
of its infantile origins, and Marx accounted for all historical events as 
manifestations of the struggle for means of production. Once liberating 





28 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


truths, these formulations have all too often hardened into sets of blinders, 
preventing the wearer from seeing the whole scope of human affairs. 

But there are alternative theories. Some of these have been applied to 
Tolkien with results that demonstrate their ability to illuminate areas of 
experience left untouched by orthodoxly scientific theory. 

In place of Saussurean structural linguistics, which focuses only on the 
abstract language system (langue) as it exists in a single point in time 
(synchronically), T. A. Shippey has applied Tolkien’s own discipline of 
philology to his created world, looking at language as it changes through 
time (diachronically) and as it appears in the specific utterances of indi- 
viduals (paroles). Though one risks loss of perspective in taking Tolkien at 
his own valuation, by doing so, Shippey has produced what is unquestion- 
ably the most knowledgeable and suggestive reading of LOTR and its 
supporting texts, such as The Silmarillion (1977) and The Hobbit (1937). 

Shippey’s thesis in The Road to Middle-Earth is that Tolkien created 
the megastory of Middle-earth and large parts of the foreground narrative 
out of his understanding of the evolution of languages, primarily English 
and its Germanic cousins. The nineteenth-century philologist viewed 
language not as some abstract structure, a code that refers only to other 
codes, but as a treasury of words, each of which carries its history along 
with it. Modern linguistics, which has made great strides in formulating 
the laws governing syntax and discourse, is far less successful in explain- 
ing the workings of the lexicon, the body of knowledge that links abstract 
grammatical structures to audible sounds and sounds to meanings. 
Tolkien’s philology has more in common with contemporary semiotic 
studies, with its concern for the signs and their interpretation, than with 
structural linguistics, which more or less ignored words. 

For the lover of words, or philologist, every word is a window into the 
past. A word like elf is also aelf and ylf and unrecorded but reconstructi- 
ble forms in proto-Germanic and Indo-European; it is a part of elfshot 
(both the tiny projectile points given the name in England and the diseases 
they were thought to cause) and of Alfred (elfcounsel); it is Beowulf, 
which speaks of ylfe as children of Cain, and Sir Gawain and the Green 
Knight, which calls the green giant an aluisch mon or elvish man, and the 
ballad of “True Thomas,” who meets “the queen of fair Elfland” (Shippey 
45). The word is, in fact, the sum of all its forms and meanings and uses 
over time, insofar as those are recoverable through philological research. 

Language records a culture’s habits and concerns, its physical en- 
vironment and its myths. Just as we can reconstruct prior forms of words, 
producing the hypothetical spellings marked by asterisks in the ety- 
mological section of a dictionary entry, we can reconstruct the worldview 
of those who used those words, producing what Shippey calls an “asterisk 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 29 


reality” (15). Tolkien’s Middle-earth is—to an extent most critics are 
unaware of—such an asterisk reality, an attempt to make the world 
perceived by the listeners of Beowulf accessible to readers in the twentieth 
century. If this world is an invented one reflecting the cultural assump- 
tions of its inventor, so are all such archeological reconstructions. 
Tolkien’s is an archeological, rather than historical, enterprise: he is 
seeking the city buried beneath the modern city, the language which our 
language rests upon and conceals. 

It is possible to miss the theoretical implications of Shippey’s detailed 
exploration of Tolkien’s names, invented languages, and storytelling tech- 
niques. It may seem to be merely another sort of close reading or source 
analysis. Yet Shippey’s illumination of Tolkien’s techniques forces a recon- 
sideration of such critical dogmas as the “death of the author.” Does 
language generate texts, using the living author as a sort of involuntary 
medium? Surprisingly, Tolkien’s example might lead us to a qualified 
“yes.” It could well be said that the English language wrote LOTR, but 
with J. R. R. Tolkien as active collaborator. Without his erudition and his 
imaginative understanding of the connotative and contextual, as well as 
structural, properties of language, the text could not have come into 
being. 

In much the same way that the Saussurean view of language can 
prevent our seeing what Tolkien was doing with language in LOTR, a 
strictly Freudian reading of the text obscures, rather than illuminates, 
much of its psychological basis. Freudian psychology—or rather a popu 
larized form of Freudianism, which is what | am really talking abou 
here—can offer certain insights into the symbolic subtext of LOTR. |} 
does not take much stretching to see the id popping out in Tolkien’s 
underground horrors: the many dark tunnels, the swarming orcs and 
trolls, the long-suppressed fiery Balrog and the gross and devouring 
Shelob. In Shelob and other spider figures we would not be far amiss in 
seeing the dark side of the mother figure: Tolkien’s unacknowledged 
resentment of his own mother’s untimely death. The same maternal image 
in its positive form is Galadriel—who is, like Shelob, powerful, female, 
and a spinner. 

It takes more ingenuity to find an Oedipal conflict, but no doubt a 
determined Freudian could do so, perhaps in Frodo’s acquiring of the 
female-symbol ring from the weakened father figure, Bilbo. But such 
armchair psychologizing leads us astray if we conclude that this is the 
major role played by Bilbo. We have learned little about the dynamics of 
the story. 

Freudian analysis of the text is most productive in examining those 
parts of LOTR that are most like horror fantasy, the Lovecraftian touches 





30 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


that Tolkien uses for contrast with his idylls and elvish reveries. Freud’s 
psychology seems particularly attuned to the rhetoric of horror, which is 
all about the revelation of suppressed secrets and disgust for bodily 
functions. All horrific fantasy, from The Monk to Stephen King, may be 
viewed as variations on a primal scene. It is regressive and disintegrative, 
breaking the psyche down to its component drives. The Freudian notion 
of art, as something to be worked through, used up, and left behind once 
it has brought to consciousness whatever complex it was encapsulating, 
may explain the process of reading or writing horror fiction, but it is of 
little use in illuminating fantasy. 

The brand of psychology that mirrors the rhetoric of fantasy is Jung’s. 
‘Whereas Freud looks to origins, Jung looks to ends: not where we came 
.rom but what we may grow into. Freud looked back to tragic myths, like 
those of Oedipus and Electra, for insight into the unconscious mind; Jung 
looked at fairy tales. LOTR can be accommodated to the Freudian model 
only as Cinderella’s stepsister fit into the glass slipper, with much distor- 
tion and more omission, but it wears the Jungian schema like a running- 
shoe. Gandalf is a textbook example of the Wise Old Man archetype; 
Frodo and his companions, especially the shadow-Frodo Gollum, repre- 
sent the fragmented psyche on the road to selfhood. It is so simple as to 
make one uneasy; can an enterprise so obvious reveal anything of value? 

It can, if we do not push it too far. Jungian analysis shows us what is 

lready apparent about a fairy tale or a fantasy, because those forms are 
verted relative to the realistic fiction. What is deep structure in a 
ckens novel is integument in a fantasy. Fantasy starts with a symbolic 
trative: it must present archetypes and it must, if it follows the comic, 
lury tale morphology, move toward self-integration. But if a fantasy is to 
be successful, those abstract universals must be recreated afresh from the 
author’s individual experience and self-knowledge. Hidden within Gan- 
dalf the Wise Old Man, the archetypal guide and protector, is a real- 
istically depicted, irascible old tutor—undoubtedly a blend of characters 
met by Tolkien in real life, including himself in the role of educator— 
which represents the way Tolkien had personally experienced the function 
of that archetype. 

What a psychological reading of fantasy should aim for is not merely 
identifying complexes or archetypes, depending on the particular meta- 
phoric scheme on which the psychology is based. Rather, it should see 
how the narrative makes use of these mechanisms for self-analysis, which 
is what all such systems really amount to. They are not real entities within 
the brain but ways of coming to understand and make use of that organ’s 
manifold electrical and chemical operations. Freud’s ego, id, and super- 
ego; Jung’s archetypes: these also are narrative functions— characters, as 
it were—within fantastic narratives that help us comprehend our own 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 31 


perceptions and motives. Jung’s narrative of the maturing self is the more 
nearly parallel to Tolkienian fantasy and therefore the more useful in 
exploring it. 

An exemplary instance of the method is Patrick Grant’s “Tolkien: 
Archetype and Word” (1981), which does not oversimplify Jung’s con- 
ception as I have done above and which points out the limits of any such 
superimposition of systems. Grant implies that every fantasy is a descrip- 
tive psychology as well, so that what is really needed is a Tolkienian 
reading of Tolkien. By serving as a point of comparison, Jung may help us 
arrive at such a reading; so, to a lesser extent, may Freud; so might the 
fantasy writer who is their equa! in formulating narratives about the 
psyche, George MacDonald. 

The Lord of the Rings is about language and about inner experience, 
but it is also about the exterior world of affairs. Therefore we need a third 
theoretical model for analyzing fantasy’s treatment of social action and 
interaction, and the currently dominant model in literary studies is based 
on Marx’s dialectical analysis of history. 

We have already seen, in Jackson’s study, how a Marxist perspective 
may be used to dismiss Tolkien. Fredric Jameson, a much subtler practi- 
tioner of Marxian or Althusserian reading, similarly avoids close exam- 
ination of LOTR: in the otherwise compelling study “Magical Narratives: 
Romance as Genre” (1975), he shunts attention away from the primary 
contemporary form of the magical narrative by labeling it “archaic 
nostalgia” (161). One wishes he, or someone of his persuasion but more 
in tune with Tolkien’s text, would investigate the problem of what he calls 
“the ideological nature of form” (161) as it is raised by fantasy. Much 
could be done with his insight that “as a literary device, this vision of a 
realm of magic superimposed on the earthly, purely social world, clearly 
outlives the particular historical and ideological contradiction [of the 
emergence of class rivalries within feudalism] which it was invented to 
resolve, thereby furnishing material for other quite different symbolic uses 
as the form itself is adapted to the varying historical situations. . .” (161). 
But perhaps the assumptions of Marxist and even Jamesonian neo-Marx- 
ist thought preclude the necessary willingness to accept Tolkien’s catego- 
ries. 

For the external world examined by LOTR is not fundamentally the 
economic and political one which Marxism posits. Politics in Middle- 
earth is primarily symbolic (Tolkien is not talking about reviving the 
divine right of kings when he installs Aragorn as High King), and the 
improbability of its economic system is an indication of its creator’s lack of 
interest in such matters. But that is not to say Tolkien is silent on the 
problems of the human community. 

Marxism posits history as the primary science and economics its 


32 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


irreducible base. Within its human universe, rival groups strive for control 
of means of production, triggering social evolution as antithetical forces 
generate a new synthesis. But means of production in the truest sense are 
not part of the social world at all. Factories do not produce; they alter 
natural products to meet human needs. The human household (to take 
economics back to its root word oikos) is inescapably dependent on the 
greater and elder otkos of nature, and an economic interpretation of 
human interactions is necessarily secondary, whether we recognize it or 
not, to an ecological one. 

One attempt at an ecological reading of fantasy is Don D. Elgin’s The 
Comedy of the Fantastic (1985). Elgin borrows Joseph Meeker’s thesis 
that comedy, which emphasizes reconciliation, regeneration, and human 
foibles and limitations, generates a perspective more conducive to the 
survival of our species than the view of man as tragic hero, above and 
apart from the world of nature. Fantasy, which maintains a comic vision 
despite the preference of philosophers and literary critics for tragic no- 
bility, represents a kind of realism in that it accepts our place in a larger 
system and also in that it insists on the primacy of immediate experience 
over abstraction, even such abstractions as humanity, nature, good, and 
evil. 

That last point may seem to be contradicted by LOTR. Isn’t the whole 
story about the conflict between good and evil? Jameson suggests that the 


magical narrative is shaped by ethical judgments which are abstracted 
from social distinctions: 


it is becoming increasingly clear that the concept of evil is at one with the 
category of Otherness itself: evil characterizes whatever is radically dif- 
ferent from me, whatever by virtue of precisely that difference seems to 
constitute a very real and urgent threat to my existence. So from earliest 
times, the stranger from another tribe, the “barbarian” who speaks an 
incomprehensible language and follows “outlandish” customs, or, in our 
own day the avenger of accumulated resentments from some oppressed 
class, or else that alien being—Jew or Communist—behind whose appar- 
ently human features an intelligence of a malignant and preternatural 
superiority is thought to lurk—these are some of the figures in which the 
fundamental identity of the representative of Evil and the Other are 
visible. The point, however, is not that in such figures the Other is feared 
because he is evil; rather, he is evil because he is Other, alien, different, 
strange, unclean, and unfamiliar. (140) 


It is true that Tolkien makes use of this tribal mentality, incorporating 
longstanding English prejudices to portray evil beings as short, swarthy 
Easterners speaking harsh (i.e., Slavic-sounding) languages. But it is also 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 33 


true that this ethical division is rendered increasingly invalid as the story 
progresses, as evil emerges among the kingly Gondorians, the blond 
Riders of Rohan, the seemingly incorruptible wizards, and even the thor- 
oughly English hobbit-folk of the Shire. Rather than abstracting good and 
evil, Tolkien localizes such qualities in specific actions: on the one hand, 
Sam’s sharing of the burden of the Ring; on the other, Denethor’s attempt 
to burn his living son Faramir along with himself. 

The Ring itself may seem to be an abstraction, and many readers have 
tried to fit it into an allegorical system, but it resists such a reading 
because it is not really abstract. It is a concrete object with physical 
properties like color, weight, an inscription that shows up under heat, and 
an extraordinarily high melting point. It also possesses specific magical 
capabilities which are the sources of its power to corrupt. Don Elgin 
provides a more satisfactory analysis of the role of the Ring than do any of 
those critics who try to equate it with pure evil. Tolkien conceives of the 
Ring as a tool with one function: mastery. Its possessor can exert his will 
over the lesser rings of power, as its inscription indicates, and over other 
beings and even over nature. Such mastery isolates (hence the Ring’s power 
to make its wearer disappear) even as it aggrandizes. Elgin points out that 
the same taint affects even those characters we take to be the embodiment 
of good: the bearers of elvish rings Elrond, Galadriel, and Gandalf. 
Though these three are diametrically opposed to Sauron, they are also 
akin to him, and LOTR is the story of their fall as well as Sauron’s. In the 
end, they must pass away from the earth because “the noble, heroic, tragi 
age has passed. . .” (58). Tolkien portrays this passing with regret, but h 
ends his story with the comic affirmation represented by Sam and ht 
family. 

To Elgin, this affirmation is neither nostalgic nor transcendental. 
Tolkien draws on the ancient magical worldview and the comic narrative 
structure because they offer something to the present. He is not merely 
indulging in pastoral idealization of nature; rather, he is imagining new 
ways of integrating human life into the systems of nature, as represented 
by Tom Bombadil’s refusal of ownership over the land (39-40) or Tree- 
beard’s stewardship of the forest (40—42). In generating narrative embodi- 
ments of an ecological viewpoint, myth provides more valid models than 
does history, for history tends to divorce humanity from the natural world, 
while myth continually reminds us of our place within it. But the myths 
must be remade, for they contain also the seeds of the alienating, abstract- 
ing perspective that turns the stranger into the Other and the earth into a 
commodity. 

By juxtaposing philology with linguistics, archetypes with Oedipal 
conflicts, and ecology with economic determinism, we see that a text like 





34 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


LOTR offers new perspective on literary theory itself. Theories like Marx- 
ist historicism, which do nothing with this text except proclaim its defi- 
ciencies, are shown thereby to be less universal than their practitioners are 
wont to claim. Other theoretical approaches prove their utility by enrich- 
ing our experience of the text and by building bridges between it and other 
aspects of our lives. 

The three theories I have offered as alternatives to the “scientific” 
approaches of Saussure, Freud, and Marx are not the only alternatives. | 
selected them because they are as at least as scientific as the theories they 
oppose; because they are fundamentally in harmony with Tolkien’s prac- 
tice and his own narrative theory, as expressed in the essay “On Fairy- 
Stories”; and because all three make certain claims about literature that 
might help us revise canonic assumptions such as those of Burton Raffel, 
cited at the beginning of this chapter. 

First, they point out that the revival of “archaic” narrative forms and 
motifs—fairy tales and myths—is not necessarily a nostalgic enterprise. 
Insofar as those myths continue to reside in our language and to offer 
insight into our psychic organization and our relationship to nature, they 
are not archaic but contemporary. They reflect human nature as it is 
perceivable in our time and place, though that may not be the same 
human nature they reflected in Homer’s day. All three theories emphasize 
the role of storymaking in our efforts to invent integrated selves and a 
comprehensible world. 

Second, they challenge the notion that literature is essentially, or even 
‘imarily, representational. They speak of words and names, of archetypal 
zures, and of narrative movement—sheer storytelling—as the fundamen- 

al stuff of literary art. Mimesis enters in later, as part of the process of 

developing and differentiating a particular narrative from its structural 
siblings. Fantastic invention serves the same differentiating function, with 
equal validity. 

Third, they all see the narrative sequence as a system, rather than as a 
neutral structure. The latter may be viewed as a mere vehicle for carrying 
more important elements like character-portrayal or societal analysis. The 
former is its own justification; it exemplifies the system-building by which 
we conceive of reality. A comic narrative like LOTR is a model of an 
affirmative, integrative worldview, which is not necessarily naive, escapist, 
or reactionary. 

In short, we have not one but three theoretical bases for understanding 
the development of the genre of fantasy as it was described in the preced- 
ing chapter. Fantasy’s reliance on the impossible, its comic structure, and 
the resulting positive estrangement or wonder it can offer the reader can 
all be understood as resulting from a particular use of language, a tech- 


Is Fantasy Literature? Tolkien and the Theorists 35 


nique for investigating the workings of the mind, and the adoption of an 
ecological treatment of humankind’s place in the natural world. 

I do not believe this is a full account yet of the inner dynamics of The 
Lord of the Rings, let alone all of modern fantasy. For instance, very little 
has been said about the social and political backgrounds of the writing of 
the text. The Marxist critics are too concerned with blanket condemna- 
tions of European capitalism to make any of the finer distinctions neces- 
sary to place Tolkien in his true setting, using the biographical data 
assiduously gathered by Humphrey Carpenter, and others have shown 
little interest. 

Likewise, any claims about the story’s psychological validity or lin- 
guistic comprehensiveness should be tested against a feminist analysis: 
LOTR is a thoroughly man-centered work and offers a considerable 
challenge to a woman reader who wishes to share in its affirmation, 
though many women readers have found the effort worthwhile. 

Some sort of rethinking of the nature of narrative is necessary if we are 
to read Tolkien without warping his text into a deviant or even failed 
example of a conventional novel. The various theoretical systems outlined 
above put us in a better position than that of the critics of 1968 to 
appreciate or question Tolkien’s narrative tactics. But these theories must 
be applied impartially and with full attention to the text, or they will 
reveal less than do the unsystematic intuitions of careful and sympatheti 
readers. 

Above all, it must not be assumed that Tolkien was unaware of 1 
things he was doing, that he achieved all his effects by accident or deviate 
from novelistic conventions without knowing the alternatives. On the 
contrary, Tolkien and other writers of fantasy have been, if anything, more 
conscious of the fundamental operations of narrative than are the critics 
who accept as absolutes such concepts as plot, character, point of view, 
and the separation of text and world. In the next chapters I will be looking 
at some of the more subversive formulations of these narrative conventions 
by Tolkien and his successors within the modern fantasy tradition. Along 
the way I will continue to draw upon a range of fashionable and forgotten 
theories in order to bring to the foreground fantasy’s capacity to challenge 
our notions of literary art. 


THREE 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 


SOME OF THE THEORISTS discussed in the previous chapter were not really 
interested in the genre of fantasy at all. They turned to Tolkien only 
because he could not be avoided in discussing twentieth-century uses of 
the fantastic. What they really wanted to talk about was the fantastic of 
Kafka, Robbe-Grillet, Pynchon, Barth, Calvino, Borges, and Lem. There 
is no question that these writers have created a lively genre within the 
fantastic mode. Following Lance Olsen, we can identify this genre with a 
general cultural movement, usually called Postmodernism because it 
seems a deliberate reaction against most of the central tenets of Modern- 
ism. 

There are many versions of Postmodernism, just as there are many 
manifestations of the Modernist impulse. What we call Modernism is not 
quite the same thing in dance as in architecture, in sculpture as in music, 
for each of these arts has its own formal properties and its own traditions 
to rebel against. Even within literature, Modernism is one thing if we 
define it through the practice of T. S. Eliot and quite another if we select 
Gertrude Stein. It follows that a writer who wishes to be Postmodern, to 
revise or supplant Modernism, will create one sort of Postmodernism if he 
starts from Ernest Hemingway, and a drastically different one if he starts 
from Virginia Woolf. 

Yet there are some persistent tendencies within Modernism, and these 
lead to equally consistent trends within its would-be successor. Most 


36 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 37 


Modernism seeks to penetrate falsehood, flout convention, and recreate a 
more authentic self (Singal 14). Therefore Postmodernism deliberately 
perpetrates illusions, adopts and even exaggerates outmoded conventions, 
and attempts to de-center the individual. Whereas Modernism values 
density of expression even unto unintelligibility, Postmodernism conceals 
sophistication within ingenuous simplicity, borrowing the styles of comic 
books (Cosmicomics) and primers (Ragtime). Modernism is often elitist 
or “Mandarin”; Postmodernism, especially in its Latin American man- 
ifestation, populist. Modernism, with some exceptions, prefers the stark, 
the spare, the somber; Postmodernism inclines toward the extravagant, 
the colorful, the patently impossible. 

The Postmodern fantastic is widely recognized as a formidable new 
force in the literary world. It is a powerful current sweeping into the 
mainstream. Admirers of its dazzling metafictional play and freewheeling 
inventiveness rarely acknowledge, however, that these characteristics are 
shared with what has long been considered a minor literary backeddy, 
namely the genre we have been calling fantasy. 

Modernism and Postmodernism encourage quite different reading 
strategies, each designed to valorize the dominant texts of its own cultural 
moment. Yet a Modernist reading is unlikely to lead to understanding or 
appreciation of fantasy, even a fantasy produced during the heyday of 
Modernism, whereas a Postmodernist reading of fantasy can illuminate 
both recent and older works. 

I propose to examine fantasy, first, as it appeared to readers with 
Modernist expectations, and then juxtaposed with examples of the 
Postmodern fantastic. Two texts are particularly well suited to this exer- 
cise by reason of their respective positions in literary history. One is, once 
again, The Lord of the Rings. The other is John Crowley’s 1981 novel 
Little, Big, in which the fantasy tradition descending from MacDonald, 
Morris, Tolkien, and Lewis converges with Postmodern uses of the fan- 
tastic. 

Literary histories written from a Modernist perspective simply omit 
fantasists like Tolkien, Lewis, and E. R. Eddison. Their works are too 
different from the dominant texts of the period. Only in the bold experi- 
ments of Pound, Eliot, Stein, and Joyce, such historians imply, did such 
psychic bombshells as Freudian psychology, Einsteinian physics, world 
wars, the Russian Revolution, industrialization, deracination, and a gen- 
eral loss of faith find adequate literary expression. 

This viewpoint is reinforced by analogous events in other arts. Along 
with Modernism’s disruption of narrative sequence and characterization, 
we have the Modernist impulse in music stretching melody and harmony 
to their limits and beyond; in painting taking leave of perspective and then 








' 


38 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


of representation altogether; in architecture stripping away ornamenta- 
tion—that is, texture and color and form not demanded by the structural 
requirements of the building itself. Works of genius like Ulysses, The Rite 
of Spring, and the Bauhaus Building helped define the age. 

And, in so doing, they pushed many works out of the critical spotlight. 
It was possible to dismiss even a popular composer like Ralph Vaughan 
Williams as an epigone, a living fossil, because he stuck to traditional 
forms and motifs, to melody and tonality. Similarly, architects like Julia 
Morgan do not even appear in architectural histories intent on tracing the 
triumph of the International Style over moribund classicism. Morgan’s 
mentor Bernard Maybeck, whose inventive, theatrical designs are the 
opposite of Bauhaus starkness, was “for most of his life . . . considered an 
eccentric in appearance, demeanor and practice—an engaging architect 
but hardly an important one” (Longstreth 128). 

For strikingly congruent reasons, J. R. R. Tolkien incurred the scorn of 
critics like Edmund Wilson, who did not see how one could seriously read 
a tale with “no serious temptations,” a lack of “development in the 
episodes,” characters who “do not impose themselves” as personalities, 
and “no instinct for literary form” (“Orcs” 329). This was not a kind of 
literature for adults in the twentieth century: it had no complexity of the 
right kind and was too elaborate in the wrong ways. 

Wilson’s model for Modernism is scientific realism fused with the 
surrealistic language of the French Symbolists, and indeed most Modern- 
ist novels seem to be essentially mimetic reporting striving to turn into 
lyric poetry. Tolkien aims at neither of those goals and instead concen- 
trates on action and scene within an obviously arranged plot. Wilson’s 
preference for a particular brand of Modernism shows in his praise of 
Yeats for outgrowing the “self-consciously archaic” fantasies of his early 
poetry (Axel 44). By contrast, he entertained no doubt that Dickens's 
work was seriously weakened by the fact that “he has admitted a larger 
conventional element than the greatest novelists ordinarily allow and has 
been content to press into service melodramatic ‘good’ characters and 
villains into whom he has scarcely projected himself at all” (Axel 177). 
Hence it is no wonder he dismisses Tolkien so easily, since Tolkien’s 
archaism is more deeply engrained than Yeats’s, and his fiction is more 
thoroughly melodramatic (if by melodrama we mean the portrayal of 
good and evil characters) than even Dickens's. 

What makes Vaughan Williams, in music, and Tolkien and Lewis, in 
fiction, seem such “dinosaurs” (Lewis, “De Descriptione Temporum” 14) 
is not merely their use of unfashionable conventions and folk motifs. A 
respectable Modern like Bartok used symphonic conventions and folk 
tunes; Eliot wrote poetry that rhymed and scanned; Faulkner incorpo- 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 39 


rated Southern folktales into his fiction—but they all did so with irony, 
distorting even as they borrowed. Vaughan Williams’s fantasias and 
Tolkien’s fantasies are non-ironic, and therefore, apparently, inartistic. 

The course of twentieth-century literature can be viewed as the gradual 
spread of irony into every phase of storytelling. Writers turned an ironical 
eye on mores, then on character and motivation, on documentary realism, 
on the arrangement of incidents into a plot, on chronological narrative, 
and finally on language itself. Each had fallen under suspicion as a means 
of discovering and conveying meaning. “Ironic” became a term of the 
highest praise to Modernist critics like Cleanth Brooks. To tell a story, as 
Tolkien seemed to do, as if it were still possible to take heroes and happy 
endings seriously was to incur the disdain of the apostles of Modernism. 

Tolkien committed such sins as telling his story from beginning to end; 
dividing his characters into good and evil; allowing the good to triumph 
over the evil; writing in transparent, workmanlike prose instead of 
densely poetic language (even in his verse); resting comfortably within a 
tradition rather than Oedipally slaying his ancestors; and supposing the 
fairy tale might be a suitable form for adult reading. His work showed 
virtually none of the signs of excellence that critics like Wilson looked for, 
and they were unprepared to see the sorts of excellence he had achieved. 

In the 1950s, when The Lord of the Rings finally appeared in print 
(its elements having been gestating for most of Tolkien’s adult life), it 
seemed that Modernist irony and Tolkien’s fairy tales could have nothing 
in common; how, then, have the literary descendants of the twain begun t 
meet? 

John Barth has described the reductio ad absurdum of the Modernist 
movement in his essay “The Literature of Exhaustion” (1967): “Some- 
body-or-other’s unbound, unpaginated, randomly assembled novel in a 
box” (29). According to Barth, Modernism’s program of “disjunction, 
simultaneity, irrationalism, anti-illusionism, self-reflexiveness, medium-as- 
message, political olympianism, and a moral pluralism approaching 
moral entropy” (“Replenishment” 70) was accomplished by the middle of 
this century. Readers had been educated, had grown wary of literary 
illusion, could no longer take narrative or narrator for granted. Nothing 
remained for Modernist writers to exercise their irony upon, and so 
Modernist fiction had nothing more to say. 

After nothing, however, must come something again. When all the 
conventions have been destroyed, says Barth, “it might be conceivable to 
rediscover validly the artifices of language and literarure—such far-out 
notions as grammar, punctuation . . . even characterization! Even plot!— 
if one goes about it the right way, aware of what one’s predecessors have 
been up to” (“Exhaustion” 31). 


40 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


In a follow-up essay called “The Literature of Replenishment” (1980), 
Barth listed writers he considered Postmodernist, hailing the “synthesis of 
straightforwardness and artifice, realism and magic and myth” (71) in 
works by Italo Calvino and Gabriel Garcia Marquez. He praises these 
works for being every bit as self-aware and carefully wrought as Modern- 
ist fictions and yet joyous, fertile, and (to Barth at least) accessible. 
Calvino’s Cosmicomics (1968), for example, is readable on many levels, 
from the simplest to the most sophisticated, because it manages to keep 
“one foot always in the narrative past—characteristically the Italian nar- 
rative past of Boccaccio, Marco Polo, or Italian fairy tales—and one foot 
in, one might say, the Parisian structuralist present; one foot in fantasy, 
one in objective reality” (70). 

So it seems the Postmodernist prospectus, both an extension of and a 
corrective to Modernism, involves a return to early narrative forms—the 
fairy tale movements and mythic structures that never really disappeared 
from more popular forms of literature—but with an awareness of their 
artificiality. Postmodernism is a return to storytelling in the belief that we 
can be sure of nothing bur story. The result is not the alienation of 
Modernist fiction or the obscurity of its Mandarins but rather, according 
to Alan Wilde, a “radical vision of multiplicity, randomness, contingency, 
and even absurdity” (10). Wilde calls this vision a new “horizon of assent” 
because it has, by abandoning the last forlorn hope of order, enabled 
writers to take pleasure in indeterminacy, coincidence, and the story- 
teller’s traditional freedom of invention. 

Though Postmodernism is still fundamentally skeptical about human- 
kind’s ability to portray any kind of reality through literature, though it is 
still highly self-reflexive or metafictional, its metafictions are by no means 
narrow, self-consuming, or nihilistic. Rather, they are characterized, ac- 
cording to Patricia Waugh, by 


a celebration of the power of the creative imagination together with an 
uncertainty about the validity of its representations; an extreme self- 
consciousness about language, literary form and the act of writing fic- 
tions; a pervasive insecurity about the relationship of fiction to reality; a 
parodic, playful, excessive or deceptively naive style of writing. ... In 
providing a critique of their own methods of construction, such writings 
not only examine the fundamental structures of narrative fiction, they also 
explore the possible fictionality of the world outside the literary fictional 
text. (2) 


It should be clear to attentive readers of The Lord of the Rings that 
Postmodernist criteria are much better suited to explaining its success 
than are realist or Modernist criteria. Tolkien’s trilogy is playful, fantastic, 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 41 


and tied to the narrative past, especially to myth and its near relatives, 
legend and fairy tale. In addition, it is as reflective of linguistic theory as 
any truly Postmodernist novel. As noted in the last chapter, T. A. Shippey’s 
The Road to Middle-Earth, taking as its central thesis Tolkien’s statement 
that “the ‘stories’ were made rather to provide a world for the languages 
than the reverse,” reveals that The Lord of the Rings is in large part a 
study of the way language shapes cultures and individual perceptions 
(19). 

Like Postmodernist fiction, Tolkien’s work is always metafictional, 
most explicitly in his shorter fictions “Smith of Wootton Major” and 
“Leaf by Niggle,” but also in the longer tales. Niggle’s painted leaf, which 
grows by degrees into a tree and then an entire world, is Tolkien’s 
illustration of the process by which order and significance are created out 
of seeming accident and inconsequentiality. In “Smith of Wootton Major,” 
the artists are what we might dismiss as artisans—a cook and a black- 
smith—but Tolkien finds their tradition-bound crafts, like that of the 
storyteller, capable of enchantment. In The Hobbit and The Lord of the 
Rings, we find frequent stories within stories; references to plans and 
prophecies; artist figures like Gandalf (first seen as an artificer of fire- 
works); and metaphors like the road that goes ever on, taking the unwary 
traveler from his own doorstep into realms of fable. Such devices are ways 
for Tolkien to comment on the storytelling process. 

Whether expressed through metafiction or through the direct dis- 
course of his essays, Tolkien’s view of literature is that handling an 
inherited form is as difficult and as rewarding as breaking new ground, 
particularly when that inherited form has been in eclipse. He was par- 
ticularly interested in the intricate mechanisms that give shape to nar- 
rative, a form of artistry he thought undervalued since Chaucer’s time. 
Beginning in the Renaissance, he felt, literary criticism had essentially 
concerned itself with dramatic rather than narrative artistry. In his con- 
cern for the latter, he is closer to the Postmodernists than to the critics of 
his own day, who, he says, are “likely to prefer characters . . . to things” 
and to “misunderstand pure story-making, and to constrain it to the 
limitations of stage-plays” (“On Fairy-Stories” 51). 

However, despite his interest in language, metafiction, and the origins 
of narrative, Tolkien is not a Postmodernist. For one thing, he was born at 
the wrong time. Just younger than T. S. Eliot, just older than Hemingway, 
he was in the very middle of the Modernist generation and, like other 
writers of his time, was shaped by war and disillusionment. The Lord of 
the Rings, with its troops and trenches, its heroism and despair, its 
beleaguered home front and its enemy to the East, is as much a product of 
World War I as is The Sun Also Rises. Also like his contemporaries, 


42 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Tolkien was schooled in commonsense realism and had to find his own 
way around it. A Postmodernist would not say, as Tolkien does, that 
“creative Fantasy is founded upon the hard recognition that things are so 
in the world as it appears under the sun; on a recognition of fact but not a 
slavery to it” (§5). Hard recognitions and grim reality are characteristic of 
Modernist fiction, of Dubliners and In Our Time, and though Modernist 
critics might condemn Tolkien for wishing to escape from objective fact, 
they would agree with him that it exists. 

Postmodernists, on the other hand, are fond of blurring the distinction 
between fiction and truth, pointing out that no text is a mirror of reality 
and that even history is first and forever a form of storytelling. Hence, 
though both Tolkien and Postmodernists are interested in literary frames, 
like the fairy tale’s “once upon a time” or the mock-scholarly introduc- 
tion, Tolkien differs from Borges or Lem in that he avoids the charac- 
teristically Postmodernist violation of that frame. He is interested in 
sustaining illusion, not violating it. 

Additionally, Tolkien, unlike most Postmodernists, does not juxtapose 
contemporary culture and traditional storytelling forms. He draws from 
folk culture but not from popular art or literature (although, of course, his 
creations have since entered into pop culture, usually in simplified form). 
By avoiding contemporary references, he finds it easier to sustain what he 
calls “secondary belief” in both the magical world and the action within it 
(37). 

Writers stimulated by the example of Tolkien have generally followed 
him in producing distanced, quasi-medieval fantasy worlds. However, it is 
possible to work within the fantasy tradition and yet play freely with 
narrative frame in the Postmodernist manner, causing the self-contained 
fantasy world to intersect with contemporary life. John Crowley, one of 
the best of post-Tolkienian fantasists, has managed to do just that in his 
science fantasy Engine Summer (1980) and in his American fairy tale 
Little, Big (1981). 

The fatter novel is long and dense with allusion and incident; a 
complete inventory of its riches would take considerably longer than this 
chapter. The book combines the mythic pattern of prohibitions, magical 
helpers, quests, and comings of age with a sharp and humorous delinea- 
tion of American artifacts, language, landscape, and values. 

The story spans seven generations of a single family, shifting from the 
recent past back to the 1890s and ahead to some time in the future, 
perhaps to the end of this century. The primary settings are an unnamed 
city that is obviously New York and a country estate named Edgewood 
somewhere upstate. 

The house at Edgewood was built by the founder of the family, John 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 43 


Drinkwater, of the Beaux Arts architectural firm of Mouse, Drinkwater, 
and Stone (reminiscent of McKim, Mead, and White). Drinkwater himself 
is a conflation of several nineteenth century figures with confusingly 
similar names. Like Andrew Jackson Downing, he is the author of a book 
called The Architecture of Country Houses. Like Alexander Jackson 
Davis, he is known for borrowings from “the Greek, Gothic, French, 
Italian Renaissance, Egyptian, and even Oriental schools” and is “credited 
with having inspired many queerly designed houses of the Victorian era” 
(National Cyclopedia 22: 174-75). And, like Andrew Jackson Davis, he 
is a spiritualist, obsessed with the possibility of communion with the 
Other World. 

Drinkwater’s house reflects both his interests. Intended to serve as a 
sampler of Drinkwater’s eclectic Victorian repertoire, it has five fronts, 
each in a different style, with fictive details to make each facade seem to be 
a whole building: 


. as they passed, it seemed to fold like scenery; what had looked flat 
became out-thrust; what stuck out folded in; pillars turned pilasters and 
disappeared. Like one of those ripply pictures children play with, where a 
face turns from grim to grin as you move it, the back front altered, and 
when they reached the opposite wall and turned to look back, the house 
had become cheerful and mock-Tudor, with deep curling eaves and clus- 
tered chimneys like comic hats. (30-31) 


This house of illusions is believable as an example of Victorian extrava- 
ganza, but it is also a work of fantastic art. Hence it functions as a stand- 
in within the story for the story itself, with transformations, sudden 
reverses, and internal complexities. Thus, perhaps because it ts a ston 
made three-dimensional, the house acts as a door to the other world 
through which the impossible can invade the world of everyday. 

The primary narrative line of Little, Big deals with the marriage of 
Smoky Barnable and Alice Dale Drinkwater (nicknamed Daily Alice), the 
architect’s great-granddaughter. The opening scene, in which Smoky 
walks out of the city through thinning suburbs and industrial parks to the 
true countryside around Edgewood, is a classic fairy tale threshold cross- 
ing. It is also a metafictional device leading the reader from one mode of 
reading, the realistic, to another, the fantastic. Arriving at Edgewood for 
his wedding, Smoky enters the complex plot that has long been weaving 
around the Drinkwater family. Important strands in this plot concern 
John Drinkwater’s courtship of Alice’s great-grandmother, the Don 
Juanish career and subsequent metamorphosis of her grandfather, the 
substitution of a changeling for her sister Sophie’s child, Alice and 
Smoky’s son Auberon’s adventures in the city (which include a thwarted 


44 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


love affair, a job writing a television serial, and a lapse into dereliction), 
and the return of Frederick Barbarossa from the cave in Germany where, 
according to legend, he has been sleeping for eight centuries. 

All of these subplots are tied together because they are the working out 
of a plan conceived by supernatural beings, evidently the fairies. These 
beings, powerful and unpredictable like the local spirits of European 
folklore, are not named by the characters or narrator, just as English 
fairies are referred to only by such euphemisms as “the Good People” to 
avoid calling their attention to oneself. Alice and her family simply speak 
of “them.” “They,” it seems, have chosen the Drinkwaters and their kin to 
replace them as a new fairy pantheon, while they go on to some higher 
order of existence. 

Crowley tells his tale in a variety of styles, some parodic, others 
straightforward, frequently adopting the leisurely voice and expansive 
vocabulary of a nineteenth-century narrator. The old-fashioned quality 
serves as another framing device, establishing the narrative as something 
other than faithful reporting of everyday life. It is underscored by the 
book’s design, with ornamental chapter headings, chapter titles, subheads 
in the margin surrounded by flourishes, and architectural-looking designs 
to mark chapter ends (only in the original trade paperback; much of this 
effect is lost in the ugly mass-market edition). These devices contribute to 
the book’s humor and frequently add an overlay of irony to the narrative 
while allowing Crowley to maintain the illusion of sincerity and un-self- 
zonsciousness in the narrative voice, as if he were telling of the perfectly 

wdinary doings of ordinary people. 

Crowley may have learned from Tolkien how to use the rhetoric of 
realistic fiction to present the marvelous. He certainly follows Tolkien’s 
example in persuading us to accept impossibilities by tying them to 
familiar objects. Alice’s wood-paneled station wagon, Smoky’s borrowed 
wedding suit, and cousin George Mouse’s inexhaustible stash of recrea- 
tional drugs anchor the magical narrative in a recognizable world, just as 
Bill the pony, Sam’s cooking gear, and Barliman Butterbur’s good beer 
help counterweight the marvels encountered in The Lord of the Rings. 

Another Tolkienian method of validation is to refer to literary or folk 
tradition as witness to the plausibility of the events described. Whereas 
Tolkien generally alludes to medieval cosmology or rura} English legend, 
Crowley turns to the unacknowledged sources of the middle-class Amer- 
ican worldview, such as superstitions, children’s books, and popular 
culture. Early in the novel, for instance, Alice goes to the pond to consult 
with Grandfather Trout—who is both a real trout and her real grand- 
father, formerly known as August Drinkwater. We accept the impossible 
situation because Crowley presents it in the context of familiar elements. 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 45 


These come from folk belief (Alice brings the trout out of hiding by 
clapping rocks together under water), from advertising (Alice poses over 
the pool like the girl on the White Rock soda bottle), from Thornton 
Burgess’s Mother West Wind stories, from the Mock Turtle scene in Alice 
in Wonderland, and from Walter de la Mare’s “The Listeners” (1912) 
(“‘Tell them I came, anyway,’ she shouted after him, her voice small 
against the waterfall’s. “Tell them I did my part,’ ” 18). One is left with an 
impression not of impossibility but of inevitability, of familiar fragments 
assembled into the order they were meant to have. 

In the face of such circumstantiality, readers must go back and rein- 
terpret statements we originally took for metaphor: “The stream that 
hurtled ceaselessly through the cleft to plunge into the pool made a 
speech as it did so, a speech repetitive yet always full of interest; Daily 
Alice listened, though she had heard it all before” (17). Abstraction gives 
way to the concrete and literal, and the long-lost freshness of an ex- 
pression like “babbling brook” is recovered through the estranging pro- 
cess of fantasy. 

But Crowley knows that this effect is best produced by copying 
Tolkien’s sobriety in reporting marvels. Whatever else is mocked or placed 
in doubt, the supernatural is played straight, as Tolkien says it must be: 
“since the fairy-story deals with ‘marvels,’ it cannot tolerate any frame or 
machinery suggesting that the whole story in which they occur is a 
figment or illusion” (“On Fairy-Stories” 14). 

Here, I believe, is where Crowley’s work is more satisfying than the 
Postmodernist narratives that undercut marvels with such devices as a 
sudden shift in tone, as if to say, “We’re all adults here and we don’t really 
believe a horse can fly.” Crowley, knowing full well we do not believe, 
reports the impossible so faithfully that we begin to question the nature of 
belief itself. 

In several of Crowley’s fictions, he demonstrates the ability of 
seemingly naive forms like fantasy and science fiction to examine complex 
relationships of narrator and narrative or story and belief. Sometimes, 
however, the sophistication of his inquiry is not evident until one com- 
pares one of his stories with the more obviously metafictional fables of a 
Postmodernist writer like John Barth. If one reads Crowley’s novel Engine 
Summer, for example, alongside the “Bellerophoniad” section of John 
Barth’s Chimera (1972), one becomes aware that both writers are working 
with similar materials, but that Crowley’s novel is the subtler treatment. 
Both stories turn on the idea of a narrator actually becoming the story he 
tells. Barth credits this transformation to the workings of the Greek gods, 
an Ovidian metamorphosis, but because his narrator has already proven 
unreliable and because of authorial intrusion and anachronism, the reader 


46 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


is not invited to explore the implications of the change. It is all too plainly 
nothing but a literary device, an allegorical fantasia on semiotic theory. 

Crowley rationalizes his transformation through a science-fictional 
device. It is gradually revealed that the narrator whose story we have been 
reading, who is called Rush that Speaks, exists in the narrative present 
only as a set of memories recorded on crystal. These memories must be 
temporarily assumed by another person in order to recapture the experi- 
ences of the original actor. By keeping the reader’s attention on the 
concrete reality of this device within the text, rather than letting it evapo- 
rate into metaphor, Crowley is able to explore subtler distinctions be- 
tween memory and truth, history and storytelling. For instance, the story 
varies according to the temperament and interests of the volunteer who 
assumes Rush that Speaks’s identity; a listener comments to the temporary 
Rush that “I don’t think any other loved Once a Day ({Rush’s lost love] as 
much as you, I mean as much as in this story. And I never heard of the fly 
caught in plastic before” (173). Barth’s method allows for no such distinc- 
tions. 

In Little, Big, as in Engine Summer, Crowley is interested in making 
fantasy comment on the way we use fiction to understand the world 
outside the story, and he finds he can do so most effectively by turning his 
irony everywhere except on the illusion itself. Since fantasy makes no 
attempt to hide its fictionality, it takes no effort at all to puncture the 
bubble but considerable artifice to maintain it. Crowley has learned from 
Tolkien that breaking a frame is not the only way to call attention to it. 

Though Crowley has been reluctant to say very much about his own 
writing, it is evident that he is aware of contemporary metafictional 
practice and intentionally departing from it. The testimony of his fiction is 
supported by his comments on Alasdair Gray’s Lanark (1985), in the 
eview for the New York Times Book Review, “From Unthank to 
slasgow and Back” (1985). He describes Gray’s indulgence in frame 
breaking: “An epilogue placed well before the end takes the form of a 
dispute between Lanark and a character—not named Alasdair Gray— 
who says he is the author of the novel. The two argue about how the story 
should end and we are given an elaborate lecture on the novel’s pla- 
giarisms and antecedents, complete with footnotes” (15). But Crowley 
goes on to comment that “this sort of self-reflexive set piece will one day 
seem as corny and as redolent of this period as deathbed scenes of 
Victorian novels seem now” (15). He recognizes that the form of fantasy 
itself implies a degree of self-reflexiveness and authorial manipulation of 
reality. It makes its metafictional statements most effectively when it 
seems most ingenuous, as in Tolkien’s perfectly sincere, perfectly impossi- 
hle narrative. 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 47 


However, Crowley differs from Tolkien in two ways. One, as men- 
tioned above, is his incorporation of contemporary life into fantasy. Little, 
Big makes use of the fantastic, as The Lord of the Rings does, to estrange 
and thereby renew our vision of simple and timeless things: rocks, trees, 
bread, moonlight, and song. Yet he also uses it to comment on popular 
media, conspiracy theories of history, the rise and fall of the automobile, 
urban ethnicity, 1960s druglore, fashions in spiritualism, and political 
demagoguery. 

The other difference is in the manner in which Crowley uses metafic- 
tional elements. Whereas Tolkien upholds a fast distinction between what 
he called primary creation (the world we live in) and secondary (the world 
of story), and his metafictional devices serve chiefly to establish the 
importance of storytelling in its own secondary sphere, Crowley indicates 
that there is no primary creation in that sense, or that it is approachable 
only through the imagination. 

Hence his characters are aware that their lives are part of a Tale, that 
any order or purpose is determined by “them,” the magical beings who 
are thus stand-ins for the author. 

Different characters have different perspectives on the Tale. Alice takes 
it for granted; after informing Smoky that their meeting was foretold, 


“But see?” she said. “It was all meant to be. And | knew it.” 

“But why,” he said, delighted, in torment; “why are you so sure?” 
“Because it’s a Tale. And Tales work out.” 

“But I don’t know it’s a tale.” 

“People in tales don’t know, always. But there they are.” (17) 


Smoky, who never accepts the magic, nonetheless recognizes even- 
tually that he has wandered into narrative: “it didn’t seem that they 
minded, that I didn’t believe in them, the Tale went on and all, just the 
same—didn’t it?” (404) He knows that for Alice the Tale is as much home 
as is Edgewood, and he hopes he has been accepted into the one as he has 
into the other. As if to confirm his belief that his world has been absorbed 
into a narrative, another character muses on reasons for a dismal turn of 
events in “the world or this Tale (if there was a difference)” (432). 

Late in the story, Smoky is distressed to feel the Tale winding to an 
ending that he fears will exclude him: 


No no no no. Things don’t have ends like that, Alice. Any more than they 
have beginnings. Things are all middles in life. Like Auberon’s show. Like 
history. One damn thing after another, that’s all. (449) 


But to Alice, being in a tale complete with beginning and ending is to 
hold life complete in one’s understanding: 


48 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


How could it be, Daily Alice wondered as they kissed, that to say such 
things as she had said to the husband she loved, on this darkest night of 
the year, made her not sad but glad, filled in fact with happy expectation? 
The end: to have the Tale end meant to her to have it all forever, no part 
left out, complete and seamless at last—certainly Smoky couldn’t be left 
out, not as deeply woven into its stuff as he had become. It would be good, 
so good to have it all at last, start to finish, like some long, long piece of 
work that has been executed in dribs and dabs, in the hope and faith that 
the last nail, the last stitch, the last tug at the strings, will make ir all 
suddenly make sense: what a relief! (452) 


A relief and a wonder: Crowley has, through Alice, just summed up 
the way fantasy imposes structure and therefore wonder on experience. In 
achieving this understanding, Alice has qualified herself to replace “them” 
as the shaper of her own tale. She can invent her own happy ending, but 
that ending will, in some respects, remarkably resemble tragedy. Even as a 
storyteller, Daily Alice will find herself constrained by the needs of the 
Tale itself. 

So, indeed, was her predecessor among “them.” Mrs. Underhill, who 
governs both world and story since she is a combination of Mother Goose 
and Mother Nature, with a bit of the Red Queen thrown in for spice, can’t 
tell what the tale means. “If I’d known more than I said I’d have said it,” is 
her answer to Violet Drinkwater, who has been suffering from one of Mrs. 
Underhill’s prophecies (52). Nor can she say whether the Tale has a happy 
ending: “Well who’s to say. . . . It’s a Tale, is all. There are only short ones 
and long ones. Yours is the longest I know” (53). 

Little, Big combines the internal consistency of Tolkienian fantasy 
with the burgeoning, unpredictable invention of Postmodernism. It man- 
ages to satisfy us as a well-executed fairy tale while challenging us to 
discover whence fairy tales arise and why we never cease to need them. 

Despite these pleasures, however, the novel has received little attention 
outside the small circle of fantasy scholars. Fans of formula fantasy find it 
puzzling, while the audience for more complex fictions either has not 
heard of it (no review appeared in any literary journal) or is put off by the 
fantasy framework. The case is much different with a very similar work, 
Mark Helprin’s Winter’s Tale (1983). 

This novel, also a fairy tale set in New York and upcountry, also 
spanning a century or more, also densely allusive, also transforming 
American artifacts into magic (the resemblances between the two novels 
go so far as to include similar treatments of the zodiac on the ceiling of 
Grand Central Station), got the kind of attention Little, Big failed to 
receive two years earlier, including a front-page review in the New York 
Times Book Review. Yet it is a less inventive book than Crowley’s, more 


Fantasy and Postmodernism 49 


monotonous in tone and style, less complex in theme. Its very real charm 
begins to wear thin somewhere in the last three or four hundred pages. It 
suffers from the same kind of pulling back, the same lack of authorial 
commitment that characterizes Lanark and Chimera. 

Reviews of Winter’s Tale show that readers classed it with Postmod- 
ernist fictions: it was seen as “fable,” as “myth,” as “magic realism,” but 
not generally as “fantasy.” Reviewers saw what they expected to see based 
on Helprin’s earlier work, which was sometimes fantastic but generally 
within the bounds of mainstream fiction. Little, Big, on the other hand, 
was published as fantasy, by a publishing house with a considerable list of 
science fiction and fantasy, and its author had previously written works of 
straight science fiction and of the hybrid form, science fantasy, that has 
begun to dominate the popular market. Helprin’s book, though a best- 
seller, was accordingly literature, while Crowley’s was popular fiction. 

One of the great accomplishments of Postmodernism, however, has 
been to break down such distinctions, resulting in what Fredric Jameson 
calls “aesthetic populism,” defined as: 


the effacement ... of the older (essentially high-modernist) frontier be- 
tween high culture and so-called mass or commercial culture, and the 
emergence of new kinds of texts infused with the forms, categories and 
contents of that very Culture Industry so passionately denounced by all the 
ideologues of the modern, from Leavis and the American New Criticism 
all the way to Adorno and the Frankfurt School. The postmodernists have 
in fact been fascinated precisely by this whole “degraded” landscape of 
schlock and kitsch, of TV series and Reader’s Digest culture, of advertising 
and motels, of the late show and the grade-B Hollywood film, of so-called 
paraliterature with its airport paperback categories of the gothic and the 
romance, the popular biography, the murder mystery and the science- 
fiction or fantasy novel: materials they no longer simply “quote,” as a Joyce 
or a Mahler might have done, but incorporate into their very substance. 
(“Postmodernism” 54-55) 


Not only does literary Postmodernism draw upon popular forms, but 
its greatest works, such as Eco’s The Name of the Rose or Garcia 
Marquez’s One Hundred Years of Solitude, are also popular successes. 
They draw freely on the storytelling arts that make reading a pleasure: 
adventure, mystery, suspense, and magic. In order to establish license to 
do so, they frequently issue disclaimers about the seriousness of their 
enterprise, saying that they are merely playing with language and the signs 
that derive from it. Theirs is not the high seriousness of the Modernists. 

Such modesty about their aims may be a clever ploy, a bone to distract 
the watchdog critics so that they may go about their business unobserved. 
What is that business? Italo Calvino gives the game away in his essay 


50 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


“Myth in the Narrative” (1975). Story, not meaning, is primary, he says. 
The first storytellers combined and recombined simple actions and famil- 


iar actors until their own internal logic asserted itself, with magic central 
to the process: 


Each animal, object, and relationship acquired beneficient or maleficient 
powers, which were to be called magical powers and should instead have 
been called narrative powers, potentials inherent in words, the faculty of 
combining with other words at the level of discourse. (76) 


But inherent in this process, he says, is the possibility that a story can 
take on significance. The tribal storyteller “goes on permuting jaguars 
and toucans until there comes a moment when one of his innocent little 
stories explodes into a terrible revelation: a myth, which demands to be 
recited in secret and in a sacred place” (79). In Calvino’s view, then, 
meaning in literature is not the result of dutiful recording of perceived 
reality, but of letting narrative formula shape natural phenomena, lending 
order and value to experience. The storytellers of our own particular tribe 
also need to “indulge in a playful attitude, a combinatorial game that may 
at a certain stage take on preconscious content and finally give it voice” 
(81). 

The same playful attitude informs the work of Postmodernist archi- 
tects like Robert Venturi and Michael Graves and composers like David 
Del Tredici, who has made a career out of musical settings of Alice in 
Wonderland the way earlier composers mined scripture or Romantic 
rerse. When Del Tredici makes use of tonality and Graves alludes to 
lassic architectural orders, they do so in a surprising fashion that could 
ye Called fantastic. They know these are neither divinely ordained sys- 
tems, as the nineteenth century thought, nor exhausted formalisms, as the 
early twentieth century believed, but “combinatorial games” that can 
occasionally generate meaning. The critical theories that validate their 
work also change our perspective on the past, justifying in retrospect the 
seeming conservatism of a Maybeck or a Vaughan Williams. 

Just so, Postmodernism justifies the practice of fantasists, who have 
always been willing to play with the inconsequential until it explodes into 
myth. So, too, fantasists like Crowley bear out the theories of Postmod- 
ernists by generating stories in which we recognize the parts of ourselves 
that defy any other means of analysis. 


Hm! 


FOUR 


Fantasy and Narrative 
Conventions: Story 


FICTION, LIKE STAGE MAGIC, is an act of collusion between performer and 
audience. The storyteller pulls a clump of sentences out of his hat, waves a 
wand, and tells us that those sentences have turned into people, scenes, 
and events. And we say, yes, I see it all. Unless the storyteller is extraor- 
dinarily incompetent or insistent on letting us in on his secrets, we are 
more than willing to be fooled. We prefer the pleasures of illusion to the 
smugness of skepticism. 

This point needs to be made from time to time—Shakespeare reminds 
us of it frequently, so that we will attend to our duties as audience. Still, 
critics forget that even our best characters—Emma Woodhouse or Emma 
Bovary—are but shadows, while the worst are capable of walking us 
through a story if we can relate them to the appropriate narrative con- 
vention. 

Conventions are the terms of agreement between writer and reader. 
Plot, character, setting, point of view—the writer agrees to organize his 
narrative around such landmarks, while we in return agree to supply the 
remembered images, knowledge of human behavior, and reading experi- 
ence necessary to put flesh on the bones and make them move. Though we 
read only words, we experience places, personalities, and a passage of 
time unrelated to the duration of our reading. 

We tend to forget that this is not an involuntary participation, like the 
perceptual blurring that makes a series of projected stills into a moving 


51 


§2 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


picture. Realistic fiction in particular emphasizes the author’s role in 
generating the narrative illusion—it becomes a product of her “authority.” 
In the critical theorizing that arose in response to the realist movement, 
tricks of the trade such as consistency of character, limited point of view, 
and the piling on of circumstantial evidence came to be viewed as ends in 
themselves. They were thought to be sufficient, as if the reader had no 
choice but to believe and be moved. 

And so arose a critical orthodoxy which ranked the covertly con- 
ventional novel above the explicitly conventional romance. In the name of 
realism, conventions like the symmetrical plot were devalued as organiz- 
ing principles for fiction. Dickens’s plots were an embarrassment, some- 
thing he, as a Great Author, should have outgrown. Walter Scott might 
just as well have stuck to the law. E. M. Forster is a typical, though late, 
spokesman of the realist program. Plot, he says, is “a fetish, borrowed 
from the drama, from the spatial limitations of the stage” (97). But plot, 
by which he means a conception of the story’s events as a function of 
character interaction, is partially redeemed by its connection with the 
portrayal of motivations. Plot can divert the audience from mere curiosity 
into a consideration of values. It can teach us to ask “Why?” instead of the 
untutored response of “And then?” (86). There is no such justification for 
story itself. In constructing a story, the writer is giving in to the reader’s 
impertinent demands to know what happened next, rather than express- 
ing her vision of human nature. 

“I wish it were not so,” Forster says: that instead of being bound to the 
convention of storymaking, the novelist could build on “something dif 
ferent—melody, or the perception of the truth, not this low atavistic form” 
(26). 

The trouble with this desire, as Forster recognized, is that it leads the 
writer out the other side of realism. A narrative freed from convention 
turns out to be even less capable of rendering experience faithfully than 
the most conventional romance: “The time sequence cannot be destroyed 
without carrying in its ruin all that should have taken its place; the novel 
that would express values only becomes unintelligible and therefore val- 
ueless” (42). 

A number of writers in this century have done what Forster dared not 
do, writing novels without characters, without motivations, without se- 
quence, without values. Experimental novelists like Nathalie Sarraute, 
Samuel Beckett, Philippe Sollers, and Alain Robbe-Grillet have effectively 
destroyed the conventional illusions of narrative, leaving the audience to 
stare at bare wires and mirrors. Such non-stories assert that there is no 
real mimesis, no representation possible through the arbitrary sign-sys- 
tem of language, perhaps no communicable reality at all, but only the 
manipulation of black shapes on the white page. 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 53 


This attempt to dismantle narrative convention is a natural, though 
unexpected, outgrowth of the realist enterprise. Those words on the page 
are, after all, the only real thing the novelist can offer. In contrast, the 
literature of unreality has provided a rationale for reconstructing the 
elements of fiction. Instead of viewing storytelling as an unavoidable 
necessity, a distasteful chore for the novelist really interested in reproduc- 
ing reality or in making a statement, some contemporary writers and 
critics are learning to see narrative conventions as the grammatical rules 
for a distinctive mode of discourse. Writers are making use of the fantastic 
to investigate the way narrative, in a two-way partnership between speaker 
and listener like that of language, creates the realities it seems merely to 
reflect. 

If | were speaking only of the elusive, erudite, self-referential fictions of 
Borges and Calvino, I would merely be repeating conventional wisdom. 
But fantasies at every level of complexity share this ability to remake 
fiction. Naive, no less than postmodernist, fantasies are capable of forcing 
the reader to reconsider the process of telling and reading stories. The 
only difference is that the pose of sophistication pushes a narrative toward 
preciosity and self-doubt while naiveté—or the deliberate imitation of a 
naive storytelling stance—tends to reconfirm the conventions that make 
narration a potentially meaningful form of discourse. 

Another way of looking at the issues discussed in the last chapter is to 
say that the postmodern fantastic, by adopting a playful stance toward 
narrative conventions, forces the reader to take an active part in establish- 
ing any coherence and closure within the text, thereby strengthening the 
conventional contract. But the same may be said about many other kinds 
of fantastic literature, including some formula novels and fantasies written 
for children. Even the simplest of fantasies sets up an initial paradox on 
the order of “everything I tell you is a lie, including this.” The blatancy of 
this untruth deconstructs the text before it begins—in a fairy tale, the 
words “once upon a time” really mean never, upon no time. From this 
paradox grows fantasy’s potential for reinvigorating narrative forms. Un- 
like more sophisticated genres, fantasy can be self-referential without 
being self-destructive; artificial without being arch. 

“Once upon a time” also signals the importance of time itself in 
fantasy. Narrative is language’s way of exploring time; it enables us to give 
shape and meaning to time in somewhat the same way architecture orders 
space. The literary convention we call story is our way of establishing 
imaginative control over time, and so is the fundamental vehicle for 
artistry within narrative discourse. 

Yet critics like Forster have for centuries undervalued story, reserving 
their praise for elegant or innovative style or the interaction of charac- 
ters—as if they were reading poetry or watching a play, rather than 


54 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


reading fiction. The first critics to pay close attention to writers’ manip- 
ulation of time were the structuralists. Vladimir Propp, Northrop Frye, 
Gérard Genette, and Robert Scholes have looked not only at fiction from 
the last two centuries but also at traditional forms such as myth, legend, 
epic, and folktale, in an attempt to devise systems for comprehending the 
compelling flow of discovery, transformation, confrontation, and recon- 
ciliation that characterizes all narrative, from the epic of Gilgamesh to 
Calvino’s metafictions. Genette, particularly, has investigated the writer’s 
strategies for controlling the passage of narrative time. Developed in 
response to Remembrance of Things Past—Proust’s exhaustive attempt to 
explore through fiction the complex interaction of memory and time— 
Genette’s structural schema shows how the writer can accelerate or retard 
the pace, anticipate the future or return to previous moments, treat 
multiple events as one or rerun a single event many times. Though Genette 
is working with an example of essentially realistic fiction, his system can 
be used to analyze the effect of a fantastic frame on our perception of 
time, 

Fantastic tales are generally seen as naive or artless because they 
emphasize story over verbal texture and depth of characterization. This is 
true of the oral predecessors of modern fantasy and is equally true of a 
work like The Lord of the Rings. Tolkien’s language varies between 
everyday speech and an archaic and formal rhetoric. His characters are 
patterned after received types—the wizard, the lady, the comic servant— 
and reveal themselves primarily through appearance and action. His 
presentation of events is governed by the rhetorical structure of a folktale, 
which, as Genette points out, “habitually conforms, at least in its major 
irticulations, to chronological order” (36). 

This narrative conservatism, however, must be reexamined from the 
vantage point of structuralist theory and post-structuralist glosses on it. 
These last alert us to discontinuities within a text, which may function as 
an independent code in which an underlying discourse comments upon 
or even contradicts surface-level assertions. And what do we find underly- 
ing fantasy’s narrative conventionality? A continuous implied assertion 
that everyday language lies, that coherent characters are inventions of the 
observer, and especially that orderliness and chronology properly belong 
to the realm of the imagination. 

Fantasy is generally defined in terms of a violation of expectations: 
prominent within a work of fantasy is some element of the impossible or 
supernatural, the writer relying on our consensus as to the nature of the 

possible or natural within the world of nonliterary experience. Hence, in 
this view, the violation occurs at the level of reference. 

The referential status of fantasy bears close attention, and C. S. Lewis, 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 55 


C. N. Manlove, Kathryn Hume, and others have proposed valuable ap- 
proaches to its investigation. Yet one can also look at the impossibilities 
that make fantasy fantastic, not as they are defined against consensus 
reality, but as they affect the conventional elements of narrative. This 
chapter examines fantasy’s redefinition of story, or the fictional represen- 
tation of time; implications regarding the convention of character will be 
considered in the next. 

The impossible in fantasy is generally codified. Magical operations are 
grouped into principles resembling natural law: shape shifters must con- 
serve mass in transforming, knowledge of names gives power over things. 
And uses of magic are governed by ethical strictures: one is responsible 
for the forces one unleashes. Magic is indeed not merely codified: it is 
itself a code as old as language, or older. It is as rule-bound as language 
and, like language, extends its realm through metonymy and metaphor, 
also known as contagion and similarity. 

This magical code is accepted in a work of fantasy as part of its 
fictional ground rules, one of the defining characteristics of its universe. 
Once admitted to the fictional world, however, magic works to redefine 
everything else. In particular, the magical code allows the author to send 
messages about narrative sequence, about character, and about the on- 
tological status of narrative statements, or, in other words, about the 
boundary between the fictional and the real. 

Essential to any narrative is a series of events arranged into an orderly 
sequence of before and after, cause and effect. It is the narrator’s pre- 
rogative to scramble that order. She may begin in the middle, use flash- 
back to fill us in on prior events, and hint at outcomes in order to heighten 
or flatten suspense. These, however, are perceived as literary devices— 
choices on the narrator’s part that leave unaltered the flow of incidents. 

What does magic do to narrative time? A writer of fantasy can, of 
course, make use of every violation of continuous flow of narrative time 
that Genette identifies in his study of Proust: jumps backward or forward; 
ellipses, summaries, and pauses; repeated retellings of a single event or the 
compression of multiple events into one by using iterative verb forms and 
adverbial markers such as would go, often, every day. 

But most fantasies avoid these devices, which are perceived as part of 
the discourse of the narrative rather than alterations of the story itself. 
Because they are encoded into the text as authorial interventions, ellipses 
and pauses and repetitions have no effect on our perception of the actual 
sequence of events. But the fantasist has the option of disrupting time at 
the level of story. Time itself may be described as jumping, pausing, 
repeating, or looping back on itself as a result of magical operations. 
There is even precedent for the distortion of story time in folk narratives, 





56 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


which often portray time in Elfland as running at a different rate than 
human time, with tragic results to the unlucky mortal who crosses the 
boundary. 

An instance of a more complete disruption of time is found in a comic 
fantasy—a formula story of a sort that might be called “gadget fantasy” — 
by John D. MacDonald, called The Girl, the Gold Watch, and Everything 
(1962). The story describes a watch with the power to halt the passage of 
time for everything in the universe except the possessor of the device. The 
result is a split: we now have not one but two independent time streams. 
From the universe’s point of view, the watch allows the protagonist to 
move about instantaneously. For the protagonist, people and actions 
around him are frozen, letting him examine and even alter the scene to his 
own satisfaction. 

Though MacDonald uses this effect primarily as a way of generating a 
formulaic plot, magical violations of time sequence may also function as a 
way of calling our attention to two important narrative conventions. One 
of these permits the storyteller to pass quickly over a chunk of time, either 
because nothing is happening that relates to the chosen narrative or 
because something is happening but the reader is not to be told about it 
until afterwards. The other convention allows a character to pause and 
observe a scene, often in great detail, while no action takes place. Neither 
is possible in real life. Both operations begin to take effect when we 
transform experience into narrative in the form of memory. By placing 
them on the same level as the events on which they operate, fantasy 
encourages us to examine their role in constructing the version of events 
we choose to remember. 

The great Edwardian children’s writer E. Nesbit explored several 
forms of magical disruption of time sequence. A rigorous pursuer of the 
logical implications of magic (and a friend of the great time traveler, H. G. 
Wells), Nesbit was especially alert to its capacity to generate paradox. The 
logic of time is most evident in her paired novels The House of Arden 
(1908) and Harding’s Luck (1910). In Harding’s Luck, for instance, 
Dickie Harding divides his time between the twentieth century and the 
seventeenth. Days spent in the earlier life take no time in the later; like the 
operations of MacDonald’s gold watch, these periods correspond to 
pauses in a nonmagical narrative. But when Dickie tries to send money to 
his later self, the times begin to impinge on one another. From then on, 
time spent in 1906 is somehow used up in Dickie’s absence in 1606. 
(Nesbit may be commenting on our way of seeing time as money, to be 
spent or saved or borrowed. Dickie has sold part of his time to gain cash.) 
Dickie, like the reader, experiences these missing periods as narrative 
ellipses, which must be filled by the summaries provided by his nurse. 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 57 


Nesbit proposes another set of time-traveling children, Dickie’s cous- 
ins Edred and Elfrida Arden, who overlap with Dickie in both seventeenth 
and twentieth centuries. These two, however, do not necessarily experi- 
ence events in the same sequence as Dickie, so that what is a flashback for 
him might be prolepsis, or a flashforward, for them. Furthermore, Edred 
and Elfrida, who have some schooling in history, tend to see the past as 
essentially less real than the present. Nesbit emphasizes its pageant-like 
quality, in their eyes, by having their time-traveling triggered by a game of 
dressing up in costumes of the appropriate era. Elfrida, heading into 
Queen Anne’s time, thinks, “It was like going into a dream. Nothing 
would be real there” (The House of Arden 79). 

Memory, even partial memory of history learned in school, seems to 
operate as a barrier between perceiver and experience. In another adven- 
ture, Elfrida accidentally gives away the Gunpowder Plot before it has 
come off, but she cannot quite believe that her actions can change the past: 
“This is James the First’s time, and I’m in it. But it’s three hundred years 
ago all the same, and it all bas happened, and it can’t make any difference 
what I say...” (141). 

But to Dickie, who in the twentieth century is an impoverished orphan 
with no chance for studying history, the past has not yet happened, and 
therefore is as real as the present. He finds a place and an identity in the 
seventeenth century, whereas his cousins are never more than tourists ir 
any past time. When he and they coincide for the first time, his reaction i: 
“I don’t like it,” because “it makes it seem not real. It’s only a dream, 
really, I suppose. And I’d got to believe that it was really real” (Harding’s 
Luck 174). 

Nesbit plays a number of games with dreams and reality, past and 
future, memory and duration. She even makes use of the magic of time 
travel to replay a scene from The House of Arden in its sequel, but from 
another point of view, altering its perceived outcome and significance. In 
order to dovetail the two narratives, she must stop time for some charac- 
ters and accelerate it for others. Dickie, for instance, must live through 
seven months of 1907 in order to catch up with his cousins, and those 
seven months are longer than the three hundred years he has already 
come. In both books, the orderliness of narrative flow is completely 
disrupted by events accounted for within the narrative, with no overt 
intervention from the storyteller. 

Diana Wynne Jones, in many ways a latter-day Nesbit, introduces a 
further complication in narrative time. In Archer’s Goon (1984), events 
that we believe are happening for the first time are revealed to be on their 
third go round. The span from the protagonist’s infancy to age twelve has 
been twice reenacted, once because of his accidental interference, the 





58 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


second time deliberately. Each time, however, new elements are intro- 
duced, so the reiteration of events is not exact. Otherwise the loop would 
be forever closed, the twelve years lived through endlessly. Enough re- 
mains constant, though, that the entire story could be told in present or 
future tense as appropriately as in the past tense: the story’s opening could 
well read, “The trouble begins/ will begin the day Howard comes/ was 
coming/ had come/ will have been coming home from school to find the 
Goon sitting in the kitchen.” Though Jones avoids such nouveau roman 
experiments and renders her unconventional time scheme in conventional 
tense, by the end of the book, the reader has been alerted to the pos- 
sibilities. Our initial perceptions have been effectively deconstructed. 

One of the elements that alters the twelve-year cycle is the memory of 
previous trips through it. Various characters possess or have access to such 
memories according to their degree of magical talent and according to 
whether they are caught within its limited sphere of operation. A charac- 
ter named Erskine, for instance, can move outside the geographical limits 
of the time bubble, while Hathaway “lives in the past” (a phrase the 
protagonist initially takes as a figure of speech). Thus they both come to 
remember more than anyone else, though Howard, who has pulled every- 
one back through time with him, seems to have an unconscious awareness 
of his prior actions. 

These memories, since they cover a twelve-year period that has not, in 
its current run-through, completely elapsed, can function paradoxically 
as prophecies: This will happen because it has happened. And, like all 
prophecies, a memory may bring about its own fulfillment or, in Jones’s 
less deterministic universe, invalidate itself because it changes the balance 

of forces. 

Prophecy has always been a major channel for magic’s infringement on 

arrative time. Whether these prophecies issue from a character like T. H. 
White’s Merlin as he moves backward through time or from gods or fates 
existing outside of time, such intrusions of future into present or past 
(many fictional prophecies are “ancient”) reveal just how arbitrary is the 
choice to imitate the one-way passage of real time in a piece of narrative 
art. All suspense, all dramatic irony, every effect that depends on the 
reader’s or characters ignorance of the future is dependent on this literary 
convention, which has grown stale because we take it for granted. But 
fantasy, by not allowing us to assume, revitalizes the convention. 

Jones herself comments on fantasy’s ability to alter narrative time in an 
article on “The Shape of the Narrative in The Lord of the Rings” (1983). 
Jones was a student of Tolkien, in two senses. She describes her experience 
as an undergraduate at Oxford, when she attended his course on nar 
rative. Despite his less than inspiring lecture style—he spoke nearly inau- 





Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 59 


dibly, she says, and “when it did appear that we might be hearing what he 
said, it was his custom to turn round and address the blackboard” (87) — 
she came away with “inklings” of the possibilities of narrative develop- 
ment, which developed into a fuller understanding after she compared his 
comments with his own practice: 


The plot of The Lord of the Rings is, on the face of it, exactly the same 
simple one he appeared to describe in his lectures: a journey that acquires 
an aim and develops into a kind of quest. But the bare plot is to any writer 
no more than the main theme of a sort of symphony which requires other 
themes added to it and the whole orchestrated into a narrative. To shape a 
narrative, you have to phase the various incidents and so control their 
nature that you set up significances, correspondences, foretastes and ex- 
pectations, until your finished story becomes something else again from its 
simple outline. Tolkien does this orchestrating supremely well . . . . (88) 


In other words, Tolkien has managed to complicate the beginning-to- 
end chronology of the fairy tale without violating it. Some of the devices 
Tolkien uses to turn a simple story into temporal counterpoint are avail- 
able to the writer of realistic fiction. Yet we are uncomfortable when a 
primarily mimetic story calls too often upon coincidence, foreshadowing, 
oracular pronouncements, or repetition of patterns. We see the author’s 
hand too plainly at work, the card up the sleeve. But when Tolkien and 
Jones set up prophecies or parallel events, they do so within the context of 
a magical world, in which coincidence and correspondence have the force 
of natural law. 

Jones points out how each major movement in LOTR is followed by 
what she calls a “coda,” in which prior events are reconsidered and future 
ones anticipated (88). The end of the stay at Bree, for instance, is signalec 
by Frodo’s putting on the Ring and disappearing under the table. This is 
parallel to Bilbo’s earlier disappearing act at the birthday party, but the 
hobbits are no longer in the safe Shire. In the Inn with them are large, 
unpredictable Men and spies of Mordor. “The fact that he puts the Ring 
on while singing a nursery rhyme only underlines the fact that such things 
are now inappropriate” (93). Indeed, Frodo’s seemingly innocent action 
leads to a precipitate flight from Bree, leading directly to the confronta- 
tion with the Ringwraiths on Weathertop. We begin to see that things 
were not quite so simple even the first time in the Shire, for the Ring- 
wraiths were there, too, sniffing around. And, if we are alert, we antici- 
pate yet another instance of putting on the Ring, when a no longer naive 
Frodo intentionally disappears from the Fellowship to go his way alone. 
Each parallel movement effectively rewrites those that went before. Each 
prepares the way for those yet to come. The explicit prophecies and 


60 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


embedded narratives merely reinforce the intricate structuring of the 
narrative, pointing out to the reader the way the magic code governs the 
unfolding of events. 

Furthermore, the characters in LOTR are surrounded by emblems of 
the past and omens of the future; in other words, time takes concrete 
form. One such form is the River Anduin. Time and rivers have a long 
metaphoric association, but Tolkien’s use of the image is unusual, as Jones 
points out: 


This Anduin has contrasting banks and, moreover, reeks of history. In a 
way, it is history, and the Fellowship is going with its current, to break up 
in confusion at the falls of Rauros. It is worth pointing out that when 
Aragorn later uses the same river, he comes up it, against the current, 
changing a course of events that seems inevitable. (98) 


Two other images relate to time. If the river is history, the sea is 
eternity, or, as Jones says, “both all time and no time at all” (98). And the 
Eye of Sauron, in the arid land at the farthest remove from the Sea, can be 
seen, “among its various significances, as the eye of the storm, the self- 
contained here-and-now, which the present has to pass through before it 
becomes the future” (98). 

These are not merely different moments in time, but rival conceptions 
of time: the transfixing of time by the Eye must be rejected, the con- 
ventional time of the River must be endured, and the transcendence of 
time represented by the Sea may be hoped for. These conceptions of time 
are also conceptions of the Self, from Sauron’s all-embracing selfishness to 
Frodo’s self-sacrifice, which wins him a place in the last sea-going ship. 

In addition to the concrete symbols that Jones points out, Tolkien also 
uses the various peoples of Middle-earth to represent different ways of 
relating to time. His elves, for instance, do not age. Death comes to them 
only through accident or violence. A major source of the eerie melancholy 
that pervades Tolkien’s creation is the occasional glimpse he gives us of an 
elvish perspective on time. Elves are surrounded by short-lived creatures. 
Some of the latter, like humankind, resemble elves and can even intermar- 
ry with them, but always with tragic results, for the mortal partner must 
die and the immortal face an eternity of bereavement. The elves have eons 
to refine their arts, but they know that anything made by them will 
crumble before their eyes, including great fortresses like Gondolin and 
enchanted woods like Lothlorien. Therefore they concentrate, in latter 
days, on song and speech, which are ephemeral and yet outlast monu- 
ments. 

Whereas Tolkien’s men are tempted into sin by the hope of outwitting 
death, the elves fall through their attempts to arrest change. They see all 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 61 


victories as Pyrrhic, all joys as echoes of earlier glories. Their Golden Age 
is no myth but an ever-receding memory. 

In addition to this elvish conception of time, Tolkien also lets us see 
the world through the eyes of the ents, who, with the life span of bris- 
tlecone pines, mediate between ageless elves and hasty hobbits. Going 
even beyond the elves, there is Tom Bombadil, the Eldest, who predates 
creation. Whereas they are wise and weary, he, who knows no beginnings 
or ends, is full of merriment and foolery. His time is a continuous renewal 
of rainfall and wildflowers, of otter-play and water flowing. 

Each of these conceptions of time is conveyed most clearly through the 
narratives of the various peoples: the falling cadences of the elves’ songs, 
Treebeard’s lengthy and long-lined verse, the hobbits’ nursery tales, Tom 
Bombadil’s way of narrating his own actions even as he performs them, as 
if every moment were a sort of rhyme fulfilling the moment before. Each 
deconstructs the others but does not invalidate them. Hobbit-time is as 
real as demigod-time. How you see it depends on where you stand to 
look. Rather than pretending to represent some sort of “real time,” 
therefore, fantasy allows for a number of different, even contradictory 
conceptions of the nature and meaning of time, no one of which is 
privileged above the others. 

But implied in the ending of LOTR is the replacement of this variety 
by the human notion of history, which is linear, uniform, and scaled to the 
human life span. Tolkien’s example shows that one effective strategy for 
reconstructing narrative time is to transform one sort of time—not merely 
past, present, and future but a distinctive way of ordering and interpreting 
time—into another through the action of the narrative. E. Nesbit hints at a 
similar reordering in Harding’s Luck, when Dickie’s old Nurse informs 
him that time as he understands it, historical time, is not real: “But there’s 
seasons, and the season they came out of was summer, and the season 
you'll go back to ’tis autumn. . .” (183). Dickie ultimately abandons the 
twentieth century, in which seasons are largely ignored, for the seven- 
teenth, in which they are the fundamental rhythm of life. In Archer’s 
Goon, too, one vision of time is replaced by another, when the closed 
circuit gives way to an open-ended future. 

In Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Tombs of Atuan (1971), magic converts 
cyclic time, the eternal return of myth, into linear, historical time. In the 
process, Arha, the ever-reborn priestess of the nameless ones, becomes 
Tenar, a unique individual in an unprecedented situation. Conversely, 
Crowley’s Little, Big follows its characters as they drop out of history into 
eternity. Crowley signals the shift by naming his heroine Daily Alice, at 
first a nickname for Alice Dale but by the end a description of her role as 
mother goddess who recreates the world daily. 





62 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Jones puts her understanding of the temporal organization of narrative 
to fullest use in her novel Fire and Hemlock (1985). Having discovered 
from Tolkien how to make a single narrative moment refer simultaneously 
backward and forward in time, she demonstrates how his technique can 
become the basis for an entire story. The relationship of present to past is 
introduced first, as the heroine uncovers a set of buried memories overlaid 
by a false past. At the beginning of the story, Polly, packing for her second 
year of college, comes across a book called Times out of Mind. One of the 
stories in the book, called “Two-Timer,” sounds a bit like Archer’s Goon: 
“it was about someone who went back in time to his own childhood and 
changed things, so that his life ran differently the second time” (4). Polly 
remembers reading the story, and Jones sneaks a sly bit of metafiction into 
her judgment: “The man finished by having two sets of memories, and the 
story wasn’t worked out at all well” (4). But other things about the book 
disturb her: “Half the stories she thought she remembered reading in this 
book were not there—and yet she did, very clearly, remember reading all 
the stories which seemed to be in the book now” (4). 

Rereading the book leads her into reminiscence, and the memories 
that emerge, like those of the man whose story she did not like, are 
double. Most of the narration in Fire and Hemlock is what would be 
called a flashback in a more conventional novel, but in this case is clearly 
an advancement of the plot. For Polly, it is the recovery of the five years 
when she was in contact with a man named Thomas Lynn, who has been 
erased from her mind and the memories of those around her. As she 
remembers events from those years, they lead her to mementos which 
trigger further memories—objects, like the book, that have been myste- 
riously altered or that fit awkwardly into the present situation derived 
from the false memories she has been given. 

The more Polly remembers, the closer she comes to understanding 
vow and why her past has become falsified by the sinister Laurel or 
Lorelei Perry. Laurel is the Queen of Elfland, and Thomas Lynn is her 
latest mortal lover and victim, like his namesakes in balladry Thomas the 
Rhymer and Tam Lin. In coming to understand the situation, Polly also 
determines her future, for she is the only one who can rescue Tom. Thus, 
each step in her search changes the events that led up to it; moreover, these 
alterations of the past change the nature of the task foreordained for her. 

The key to recovering the past and reaching a successful conclusion 
lies in the generation of narrative. In addition to the narrative that Polly 
tells herself as she reconstructs the missing years, several other narratives 
are essential to the construction of Fire and Hemlock. There is the story 
that sets her to remembering, of course, which in the revised past is part of 
a collection written by Tom Lynn and the other members of his string 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 63 


quartet. It is still “less good than any of the others” (211). Another story in 
the collection is called “Fire and Hemlock,” which is also the title of a 
photograph on Polly’s wall. This photograph, not surprisingly, holds 
stories within it, or used to before Laurel’s magic altered it: 


Dark figures had seemed to materialize out of its dark center—strong, 
running dark figures—always at least four of them, racing to beat out the 
flames in the foreground. There had been times when you could see the 
figures quite clearly. Other times, they had been shrouded in the rising 
smoke. There had even been a horse in it sometimes. (3) 


In addition, fire and hemlock constitute the ingredients of the spell with 
which Polly pulls disaster down on herself. 

The narratives of the two ballads mentioned above provide Polly with 
important clues to the narrative in which she finds herself. As she reviews 
the past, she realizes that Tom Lynn’s gifts of books frequently have 
disguised such clues: he has sent her innumerable fantasies, stories of 
King Arthur, the book in which she finds the ballads, The Golden Bough, 
and a collection of fairy tales, of which he says, “Only thin, weak thinkers 
despise fairy stories. Each one has a true, strange fact hidden in it, you 
know, which you can find if you look” (117). 

Besides providing clues about his enslavement by Laurel, these books 
exercise Polly’s imagination, which is important because any hope of 
freeing him depends on a game he and Polly play, in which she invents a 
story that is and is not about them both. That is, it is a fantasy, in which he 
is a hero named Tan Coul and she is his apprentice. They begin to inven‘ 
the story together when they first meet, and continue it in letters. H 
realizes, though she does not, that the things they invent come true—th 
Queen of Elfland has given him the same gift she gave Thomas Rhymer, ot 
speaking nothing but truth. So when he discusses with Polly her ideas 
about Tan Coul’s horse, his three co-heroes, or his search for a magical 
implement called the Obah Cypt, he insures that those things will come 
to pass. The other heroes, for instance, show up as the musicians who will 
help him form his string quartet. (They call themselves the Dumas 
Quartet, in reference to yet another narrative.) The four heroes are the 
four figures in the Fire and Hemlock picture, and the other members of 
the quartet support Tom and Polly in the final showdown. The stories thus 
constitute the only means of diverging from Laurel’s plans for Tom’s 
future as a sacrificial victim. 

In Fire and Hemlock, time is a spell, and spells are stories, and stories 
are the only way to pin time down and make it behave. There are levels to 
the book that I have not touched on, including a second invented history 
for Tan Coul and his assistant that also comes true, but in a completely 


64 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


different fashion. Many clues are also offered to the reader about how a 
story may be constructed out of other stories without merely imitating 
them. When Polly discovers Tolkien, for instance—on her own, not a gift 
from Tom—she decides the Obah Cypt must be a dangerous magic ring. 
But Tom realizes the magic of narrative cannot work that way: he re- 
sponds with a postcard saying, “No, it’s not a ring. You stole that from 
Tolkien. Use your own ideas” (127). Whereas Polly’s earlier mixture of 
half-remembered, and thus wholly original, motifs was of service to Tom, 
her attempt to draw directly from another tale is doomed to failure. 

This fantasy, so intricately constructed as to defy summary; so full of 
metafictional devices; so Proustian, one might say, in its transformations 
of sequence, order, and duration—this novel was published for young 
readers. If such readers are sufficiently well read to recognize its use of the 
fairy tale structure of quest and qualified happy ending, they should have 
no trouble in either following the tale to its conclusion or in absorbing its 
lessons in narrative art. Like Tolkien, Jones is educating her audience tn 
the conventions that allow fixed words on a page to simulate the passage 
of time. As the audience learns to participate, these conventions are 
reinvigorated, and the possibilities for further narrative invention are 
enhanced. 

Furthermore, because a work of fantasy must by (my) definition reach 
a successful conclusion, must resolve whatever dilemmas it raises in such a 
way that gains, however slimly, exceed losses, it can comment obliquely on 
the role of conventions in other kinds of narrative. Most particularly, 
fantasies can alter our sense of an ending. 

When John Crowley transforms time into a mythic eternity at the end 

of Little, Big, he also places his characters at the same level of narrative 
reality with time itself, for Father Time, complete with hourglass and 
cythe, makes a brief appearance in the book. Daily Alice and all who 
ccompany her through the final transformation become the equals of 
fime and thus no longer subject to time in its most disturbing aspect: 
death. 

Since the story of every living being has the same ending, a mimetic 
narrator has two choices for ending his story. He can follow characters to 
their deaths or stop short of the final scene. Strictly realistic works must, 
therefore, either end tragically or inconclusively. Such conventional end- 
ings as the discovery of treasure, a long-deferred reunion, the capture of a 
criminal, or a marriage always leave the possibility of asking E. M. 
Forster’s “And then?” If we accept these events as conclusions it is because 
they satisfy our sense of story, not of mimesis. As the modern equivalents 
of “They lived happily ever after,” they mark forms like the detective novel 
as modern versions of romance. From a realist’s point of view they 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 65 


represent compromise, a necessary evil, like the need to maintain au- 
dience interest through suspense. 

But such devices are the basis of the fantasist’s art form. The beginning 
of a fantasy already implies an ending that is, by realist standards, 
contrived—one that will provide for all characters and answer all ques- 
tions. This is one reason that good fantasy is difficult to write, and that 
many writers evade their responsibility by borrowing an ending from 
Tolkien or elsewhere. The fact that the ending must be implied in the 
beginning complicates the task further, for if there is no surprise, there is 
no reason to read on. But the best fantasies do what Jones says Tolkien 
does: 


you are told, this early on, exactly what is going to happen. And you are 
still in doubt that it will. Each of the Fellowship of the Ring says exactly 
what his intentions are, and yet you do not believe they will do as they say. 
Each time I read it, I am still pained and shocked when the Fellowship 
divides later on. I am still in doubt that the Ring will be destroyed, or what 
good it would do if it was. It seems to me to need some explaining how 
Tolkien got away with it. (94) 


One explanation is that although the ending is what we expect, Its 
meaning is unexpected. We expect that Frodo will destroy the Ring and 
return to the Shire, but we do not realize that he will do so only by 
becoming a different sort of being: a hero, with the grandeur and the 
tragic overtones that all true heroes have. Yet we should have known that 
only a hero can fulfill a heroic task. The ending is there, but only the 
passage of narrative time allows us to see it as we look back. 

If mimetic storytelling is the witch who says, “Beauty will prick her 
finger and die,” fantasy is the forgotten fairy who can step out of line to 
convert death into something stranger. Frodo passes away, like King 
Arthur, but he does not die. Ged, in Le Guin’s The Farthest Shore (1972), 
journeys to the country of death and on beyond to life again. John 
Crowley’s Smoky Barnable dies on the threshold of immortality but is 
there with Daily Alice all the same, is indeed an essential ingredient in the 
new world she creates. The magical code gives access to a whole range of 
alternative endings, of ways of reordering time. 

Since an ending is a frame dividing the world of the story from that of 
the reader, to alter the nature of endings is to blur the boundaries. If 
magic can make things already reported not have happened, changing 
reality retroactively, or turn the inevitable into the unexpected, then it is 
not surprising that it can also violate the barrier separating the time 
represented in the narrative from the times of composing and reading the 
text. 





66 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Most fantasy writers provide clearly defined frames: narrative devices 
that establish a relationship between the fantasy world and our own while 
at the same time separating the two. These might consist of threshold 
stories, in which characters move from a realistic setting into another 
realm, or embedded narratives like Tolkien’s Red Book of Westmarch, an 
imaginary text that presumably exists in our world and contains the 
records of Middle Earth. 

Yet these frames, too, can be disrupted by magic. The framing device 
in Jones’s The Spell-Coats (1979) is an unusual form of embedded nar- 
rative: a pair of woven garments whose stitches function as both words 
and spells, so that the coats are both the record of events and major 
elements within those events. The narrative is thus part of the story, a 
paradox that brings to the foreground such problems as selecting and 
ordering incidents in such a way as to reveal more than the storyteller 
herself knows. Closure, too, becomes a problem when the end of the story 
can only take place after the narrative—the woven coat—has been com- 
pleted. Magic, which causes these problems, also solves them: the end of 
the story is revealed in a prophetic vision which only takes on its full 
meaning after the reader has finished reading: the ending is both inside 
and outside the narrative proper. 

Thus magic can blur boundaries and question the status of fictional 
narrative itself. It can make the reader imaginatively enter the narrative 
fabric or give characters access to the storytelling process that has invented 
them. Jones illustrates the latter possibility in Fire and Hemlock and even 
more explicitly in Archer’s Goon, where a typewriter on which anything 
typed becomes true (a not uncommon motif in fantasy) becomes a means 
for cutting through levels of reality: 


Quentin announced solemnly, “I now begin.” Everyone was quiet while he 
tapped away at the keys. Howard watched the words coming over Quen- 
tin’s shoulder. “The first to appear was Archer. . .” 

“Archer’s coming!” Awful called from the window. 

Howard sped over there to look. Archer’s Rolls was nosing its way 
through the main gates, silvery in the moonlight. Its headlights blazed 
across the light streaming from the door of the temple. 

“‘in his Rolls,’” Quentin murmured as he typed, “‘headlights ... 
light from temple. . .”” (234-35) 


Is the story we are reading the same as the story Quentin is writing? 
Yes and no: the two keep converging, yet the characters’ awareness that 
they are inventing the action keeps them apart, and keeps pushing one of 
those narrative levels in the direction of primary reality, the level at which 
we envision Diana Wynne Jones sitting at a similar typewriter inventing 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Story 67 


Quentin and his typewriter. Yet that, too, is a fiction, a phantom narrative 
conjured up by the text, for Jones's act of invention is over, and for that 
matter, we do not know that she even used a typewriter to record it. 

Because magic can bring embedded narratives up to the story’s pri- 
mary level of reality, as when the main characters in Fire and Hemlock 
come face to face with characters they had made up as a game, it is evident 
that virtually any metafictional device may be incorporated into fantasy at 
story level, as part of the workings of the magic that makes it fantastic. 
Legend may become history, past merge with future, and characters 
dictate their own fates, all without breaking the ground rules initially set 
and accepted by the reader. 

Unlike realist texts, fantasies freely acknowledge their own disjunc- 
tions and deny at the outset any direct applicability of their fictional 
discourse to the realm of action and perception, but the result is not 
disorder and disillusionment. 

Rather than leaving us in a solipsistic void, fantasy invites us to re- 
create what it has denied. As soon as it is announced that the world we are 
reading about bears no relation to our world, we begin to make connec- 
tions. If physical rules have been altered beyond recognition, we look for 
moral rules. If we are confronted by a being whose appearance and 
powers deny its humanity, we begin to look for human motivations. If time 
is fragmented, reversed, or looped upon itself, then we are encouraged to 
exercise our own storytelling powers to draw a connection from beginning 
to end. By forcing a recognition of the arbitrariness of all such narrative 
conventions, fantasy reminds us of how useful they are, not only in literary 
sleight of hand, but also in formulating our own imaginative understand- 
ing of our existence in time, which can only be comprehended through 
narrative. 

The pose of innocence, the seeming simplicity of most modern fantasy, 
is necessary for the success of the reconstructive function. As Fredric 
Jameson points out in a discussion of the related mode of science fiction, 
certain types of naiveté seem to coexist with “wide influence, historical 
importance . . . and even artistic quality and value. If this is so, then. . . 
we should inquire whether the formal possibility of a certain kind of 
aesthetic and narrative value may not rather presuppose and be dialec- 
tically related to just such otherwise seemingly oversimplified content” 
(“Science Fiction” 46). 

Though some authors seem to be alarmed at the potentially disruptive 
nature of the fantastic, and hence retreat into the safe confines of formula, 
others have risen to the challenge. Tolkien, Jones, Crowley, and the like 
produce texts that look “readable,” in the terminology of Derrida and 
Barthes, but that are, in their ultimate implications, “writable.” They 


68 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


must be constructed, rewritten, assembled into meaningful order by the 
reader, who has been given a guide to the process in the very magical 
operations he is reading about. 

By placing questions of memory and fate, cause and effect, invention 
and experience at the level of story, rather than leaving them at the 
discretion of a narrator as realistic fiction tends to do, fantasy suggests 
that they are central to the process of storytelling, and not mere stylistic 
choices. They operate at the level of narrative code, rather than of dis- 
course. A realistic work is merely one that disguises the doubts built into 
its fictionality. By displaying rather than suppressing the arbitrariness of 
narrative choices, fantasy can breathe new life into its own conventions. 


FIVE 


Fantasy and Narrative 
Conventions: Character 


A FICTIONAL CHARACTER is composed of a set of textual fragments scat- 
tered through a narrative. The most common of these are passages of 
description ascribed to a narrator or to other characters, passages sum- 
marizing actions, and passages of speech or internal commentary ascribed 
to the character herself. In the theater, an actor constructs a consistent 
conception of a character from similar fragments and attempts to embody 
it, lending the fictional construct the solidity of her physical presence and 
the continuity of her voice, features, and expressions. Our experience of 
Hedda Gabler or Blanche DuBois differs from our experience of real 
acquaintances only in the duration, intensity, and one-directionality of 
contact. 

But with a novel, the reader performs all the characters on the stage of 
his imagination, using the stage directions provided by the narrator. 
Evidence of this performative element is the widely varying response of 
different readers to the same character. Tolkien is a good example: his 
Gandalf is a figure of power or a colossal bore; Samwise is a cringing 
servant or a sturdy companion. One senses that readers bringing back 
such disparate reports have “seen” different “productions” of the novel: in 
one case as clumsy as a school pageant, in another a rendering by the 
Royal Shakespeare Company. Curiously enough, it is often unsophisti- 
cated readers who mount the most vivid mental productions, while 
professional critics give half-hearted read-throughs. 


69 


70 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


This theatrical analogy, like the reference to prestidigitation in the last 
chapter, is intended to reflect the conventionality of narrative elements, 
especially the necessity of collusion between writer and reader. But it is 
dangerous to carry the analogy much further, for characters in narrative 
fiction are fundamentally different from theatrical characters. This dif- 
ference is demonstrated most clearly in fantasy. In illustrating the unusual 
treatment of character by some fantasy writers, however, I] hope also to 
suggest new and productive ways of analyzing the status of fictional 
characters in general. 

To begin with, fantasy characters very rarely resemble the sort of 
beings found in Ibsen’s plays or nineteenth-century social novels. Ursula 
K. Le Guin borrows Virginia Woolf’s name for the latter sort of charac- 
ters—Mrs. Brown (“Science Fiction and Mrs. Brown,” The Language of 
the Night 101—19). Mrs. Brown is any fictional character who not only 
comes to life for the duration of the fiction but also continues to haunt the 
reader. She seems larger, if not than life, at least than the text in which she 
has her existence. She is usually based on close observation of real peo- 
ple—Woolf says she saw her Mrs. Brown for a few moments in a railway 
carriage. She represents, without generalizing, human nature; that is, we 
recognize in her (described) appearance, her (recounted) actions, and her 
(reported) words a being separate from but similar to ourselves. She can 
trigger a powerful affective response that goes something like, “If I were 
not myself, I might be this person. I know what it is to be Mrs. Brown.” 
To this extent, Mrs. Brown is equivalent to the psychological concept of 
the Other, recognition of which is essential to the formation of the Self. 

Le Guin’s essay primarily concerns the presence or absence of Mrs. 
Brown in science fiction, but she deals briefly with fantasy as well: 


If any field of literature has no, can have no Mrs. Browns in it, it is 
fantasy—straight fantasy, the modern descendent of folktale, fairy tale, 
and myth. These genres deal with archetypes, not with characters. The 
very essence of Elfland is that Mrs. Brown can’t get there—not unless she 


is changed, changed utterly, into an old mad witch, or a fair young 
princess, or a loathely Worm. (106-107) 


Though she later qualifies this statement, Le Guin here identifies fantasy 
with a completely different conception of character, using the Jungian 
term archetype. Rather than basing characters primarily on observations 
of behavior, the writer of fantasy, she says, can “break the complex 
conscious daylight personality into its archetypal unconscious dreamtime 
components, Mrs. Brown becoming a princess, a toad, a worm, a witch, a 
child—so Tolkien in his wisdom broke Frodo into four: Frodo, Sam, 
Sméagol and Gollum; perhaps five, counting Bilbo” (107). In other 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character va 


words, the characters in a fairy tale or modern fantasy can be viewed as 
internal phenomena, embodiments of psychological phenomena acting 
out their struggle toward integration in a projected landscape of the mind. 
Another fantasy writer, Stephen Donaldson, propounds much the same 
Jungian conception of character and setting in his essay “Epic Fantasy in 
the Modern World.” Both writers affirm the legitimacy of such a con- 
ception of character. It is not inartistic, as E. M. Forster and others have 
maintained, to have characters whose primary significance is their ad- 
vancement of the story. Some psychological processes are inaccessible 
except through the narrative interaction of archetypal characters. 

Having equated the novelistic character with the Other, then, we might 
put fantastic characters on the side of the Self, the inner, hidden Self that 
may have little to do with habits, mannerisms, and daily concerns. Yet 
there is a paradox here. What is the source of these archetypal characters? 
Do they arise from introspection and self-analysis? Are they intensely 
private symbolic systems, each encoding a unique psychic balance? Ob- 
viously not. Fantasy learned this conception of character from fairy tales 
and myths, which are by definition public property. Anonymous, tradi- 
tional, their origins lost in pre-literate prehistory, magical fairy tales 
would seem to express the identity of the group, not the individual. Until 
such stories were collected and transcribed, their existence depended on 
continual re-creation through communal performance. In oral traditional 
societies, tale-telling is the principal means of inducting the individual 
into the worldview of the group. 

The distinction of Self and Other, then, does not cover the difference 
between the two conceptions of character represented by fairy tales and 
novels, between Beauty and Mrs. Brown. Insofar as Beauty reflects a 
fundamental psychological principle, she relates to interior experience, 
but she is also a social phenomenon—the product of generations of public 
performance (adapted, in the form we know her, according to the literary 
tastes of eighteenth-century France and the artistry of Madame de Beau- 
mont). Mrs. Brown is portrayed strictly through external details—Virginia 
Woolf describes her size, age, clothing, expression, actions, and speech— 
and yet is doubly expressive of inner life, her own and her observer’s. In a 
sense, Beauty has no self, being so entirely at the service of the story that 
she does not even have a name, only a nickname designating her function. 
Mrs. Brown is all identity and no story; if Woolf had put her into a novel 
instead of an essay she would still refuse, as it were, to perform to order. 

This last distinction suggests a way to describe the characters of folk 
narratives without making a priori assumptions about psychological or 
social function. They may be defined as essential elements of the narrative 
itself, called “functions” by Propp and the Russian Formalists. A character 


72 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


in a fairy tale is what he does. Beauty is only secondarily the pretty 
daughter of a merchant; she is primarily the one who redeems the Beast. 
Characters in other tales are similarly role-bound: hero, helper, giant- 
killer, adversary. Like novelistic characters, they are verbal constructs, 
assemblages of textual fragments, but unlike the characters of realistic 
fiction, they consist primarily of descriptions of movement and transfor- 
mation. The textual clues that comprise a realistic character, as Seymour 
Chatman tells us, add up to a set of consistent (or believably inconsistent) 
traits, by which we could recognize the character even without a proper 
name to go by (119-25). The textual clues that comprise a fairy tale 
character add up to an achieved movement, like the testing of the hero or 
the rescue of a prisoner. Both kinds of character are forms of narrative 
discourse. Neither is inherently superior. There is no particular virtue in 
being motivated by envy, melancholy, or some other trait rather than by 
narrative necessity. 

But modern fantasy is not simply a revival of the fairy tale, and its 
characters can combine the two forms of discourse, just as the genre of 
fantasy combines the mimetic and fantastic modes. Frodo performs the 
role of hero, but he fits into that role only approximately; in some ways he 
barely fills the outline, in others he is too solid to be contained within it. 
We know too much about Frodo. As Le Guin says, he “really looks very 
like Mrs. Brown, except that he has furry feet; a short, thin, tired-looking 
fellow, wearing a gold ring on a chain round his neck, and heading rather 
disconsolately eastward, on foot” (107). Like no other character in LOTR, 
Frodo establishes himself independently of his role in the story. We know 
his habits, likes, dislikes, kindness, occasional pettiness, courage, 
laziness: a whole set of novelistic traits, most of which will need to be 
pared away by the end of the narrative if he is to become the Hero it 
requires for resolution, a grander but simpler being than a mere hobbit. 

Tolkien underscores Frodo’s uncomfortable transformation from real- 
istic character to story function with a few magical clues. A device that 
Tolkien uses frequently might be called the “seeming”: the brief glimpse 
(occasionally false) of an underlying reality. An example of a seeming that 
reveals Frodo’s new stature is Sam’s vision of him with a temporarily 
cooperative Gollum: 


For a moment it appeared to Sam that his master had grown and Gollum 
had shrunk: a tall stern shadow, a mighty lord who hid his brightness in a 
grey cloud, and at his feet a little whining dog. (II, 225) 


Tolkien’s heroic figures are invariably tall and bright. Critics of his tech- 
nique mistake these for character traits, whereas they are more properly 


role-markers. 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 73 


Sam’s seeming shows how Frodo is expanding to fit his destined role, 
but other glimpses show the cost. His individual character traits give way, 
marked in magical terms by a gradual fading. Gandalf first notices this 
change after Frodo is wounded by the Ringwraiths: “But to the wizard’s 
eye there was a faint change, just a hint as it were of transparency, about 
him, and especially about the left hand that lay outside the coverlet” (I, 
235). 

Both transformations are essentially complete by the time Frodo 
reaches the gates of Mordor. As Sam sees him lying in the deathlike trance 
brought on by Shelob’s poison, “Frodo’s face was fair of hue again, pale 
but beautiful with an elvish beauty, as of one who has long passed the 
shadows” (II, 342). Frodo the hobbit is essentially dead; the elvish beauty 
and pallor (which are from one perspective the Hero’s brightness, and 
from another the fading of individuality) mark his new identity. It should 
surprise no one that Frodo fails to fit into the life of the Shire after the 
return of the Fellowship. His proper milieu is no longer a setting but a 
story, and his story is over. 

Modern fantasy thus draws on two traditions of characterization. To 
avoid confusion with psychological theories or value judgments, I will not 
call these character formulations realistic or archetypal. A. J. Greimas has 
provided a less loaded terminology: as an element in the construction of a 
story, a character may be called an actant—the French participial ending 
conveys the sense of doing that is essential to such characters. A characte’ 
who is more interesting for his individual qualities than for his place in : 
shaped narrative is an acteur (Scholes, Structuralism 103), or, substituting 
the English form, an actor. 

Fantasy, then, makes use of the narrative and semiotic code we call 
magic to examine the relationship between character as imitated person 
and character as story function, between actor and actant. One way it 
does so is by calling into question the continuity of traits by which the 
reader is accustomed to identify characters. A minor example is Tolkien’s 
changing of Gandalf’s identifying color from grey to white. Even so small 
a change causes confusion, for color was the primary external difference 
between Gandalf the Grey and Saruman the White. Other characters 
alter: Merry and Pippin grow taller (for which we are intended to read: 
more heroic) after drinking Treebeard’s draughts. Frodo grows simulta- 
neously grander and more wraithlike. Gollum shifts back and forth 
between beast and wizened hobbit. But within LOTR, for the most part, 
we are clearly alerted to the moments of change, and so the continuity of 
traits is at least partially preserved. 

In other fantasies, however, characters are fed through the mechanism 
of magic like grapes through a wine press, emerging with unrecognizable 





74 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


shapes and flavors. Virtually any character trait can be altered magically: 
appearance, age, voice, emotional state, memory. In Patricia McKillip’s 
Riddle-Master trilogy (1976—79), for instance, the hero Morgon learns to 
change his form to that of a tree: 


The chill from his motionlessness began to trouble him, then passed as the 
silence became a tangible thing measuring his breath, his heartbeat, 
seeping into his thoughts, his bones, until he felt hollowed, a shell of 
winter stillness. The trees circling him seemed to enclose a warmth like the 
stone houses at Kyrth, against the winter. Listening, he heard suddenly the 
hum of their veins, drawing life from deep beneath the snow, beneath the 
hard earth. He felt himself rooted, locked into the rhythms of the moun- 
tain; his own rhythms drained away from him, lost beyond memory in the 
silence that shaped him. (The Riddle-Master of Hed 184) 


This tree does not share Morgon’s appearance, his humanity, even his 
perceptions, yet the narrative demands that we accept it as Morgon. 
When, then, might the character be said to change identity? If the trans- 
formation were irreversible? If Morgon remained in tree form long 
enough to lose his memories of humanity? If we found out that he had 
originally been a tree, and that his human shape was an illusion? If 
another character came along claiming to be the real Morgon, with 
Morgon’s memories to prove it? A fantasy can pose any of these questions 

imply by positing magical operations such as shape shifting, transfer of 
ersonalities, or reduplication of characters. 

In the case of Morgon, although his identity passes intact through the 

ree episode, it undergoes more serious alteration as the narrative pro- 
ceeds. Like Frodo, he is required to be a hero. The hero he must become 
already has a name: Star-Bearer. The stars are on his face, birthmarks, but 
they also appear on a harp and a sword made long before his birth: in 
other words, the identity predates the man. McKillip poses the dilemma in 
the form of a riddle, and riddles are, in her created world, the foundation 
of magic. 

Other riddles emerge from the story to interact with Morgon’s quest 
for his own identity. McKillip offers a set of names to be sorted out: names 
from ancient history, from cosmology, and from Morgon’s personal expe- 
rience. The High King, the High King’s harpist, the Founder of Lungold, 
the Wizard Ghisteslwchlohm, the Riddle-Master Ohm, the Wizard Yrth 
(pun undoubtedly intended), the man called Deth (another serious pun), 
Earth-Master, Shape-Changer: all these identities are combined and re- 
combined—ultimately into only two beings—as Morgon learns more 
about the past and present. Each reshuffling of the names of these others 
contributes also to his own self-definition. 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 75 


McKillip’s most unusual variation on the formation of character is to 
make the mimetic side, the actor, rather simple, and the story-function 
side, the actant, both complex and variable. Morgon’s character is 
sketched briefly at the beginning, chiefly in terms of his youth, his intel- 
ligence, and his ties to his rural homeland. We are given just enough 
information to establish him as a believable type, not a memorable indi- 
vidual, before the story carries him away to begin his transformations. In 
the course of three volumes, he is called on to play a great many roles, so 
that we see him as questor, questioner, answerer, accuser, victim, by- 
stander, lover, pratfaller, rescuer, and mystery. Each role calls on unfore- 
seen abilities, which must then be integrated into the character as we have 
come to know him. 

The entire story hinges on the interaction of power and identity, which 
are represented as contraries, like movement and structure or sea and 
land. Morgon ultimately must resolve the paradox, mastering both, be- 
coming a self that is both Morgon and Star-Bearer, both person and story. 

MckKillip’s technique of characterization illustrates fantasy’s ability to 
bring two forms of discourse together in an irreducible and yet insepara- 
ble whole. To borrow a term from Mikhail Bakhtin, a fantasy character is 
essentially a dialogue. Mimesis speaks; story responds; character forms in 
the tension between the two (Todorov, Mikhail Bakhtin 60-63). 

In both Tolkien’s and McKillip’s formulations of the dialogue, the 
discourse of the actor is introduced first, but that need not always be the 
case. Diana Wynne Jones begins The Time of the Ghost (1984) with the 
perceptions of a character who has virtually no realistic character traits, 
though neither the character nor the reader is at first aware of her 
undefined state. She is a ghost, of sorts, a disembodied consciousness with 
a memory of belonging in a particular place but no memory of who she is 
or was. She is also a plot device, as most fictional ghosts are: a need, to be 
fulfilled through the action of other characters. 

Her need is to find out whose ghost she might be and how she got that 
way, but the question is not a simple one. As she accumulates experiences, 
she recovers partial memory and identity, but only to the point of being 
certain that she is one of four sisters, all of whom seem to be carrying on 
perfectly normal existences apart from herself. 

The ghost faces a problem very like that confronted by a reader trying 
to get to know a character: how to assemble clues of various sorts—bits of 
conversation, random memories, relationships with other characters— 
into a coherent personality. Only in this case, her very existence depends 
on her ability to construct a self from the clues. 

She begins by accepting the testimony of others. Though she is invis- 
ible, people sense her presence and sometimes speak to her before looking 
around to see nobody there: 





76 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Under the frown, Phyllis said wearily, “Your father’s told you, I’ve told 
you. How many times have you been told to stay behind the green door, 
Sally?” 

Warmth and comfort and pleasure swelled, as huge and swift as the 
balloon of panic had swelled earlier. Mother had seen her. Mother knew 
her. Mother knew who she was. She was Sally. Of course she was Sally. 
Everything was all right, even though she had gone and done an awful 
thing and interrupted Father while he was teaching. . . . Sally—yes, she 
was sure she was Sally—stood guiltily by the green door, wondering how 
to explain, as Phyllis turned her blue eyes and tired frown towards her. 


(11) 


This, of course, is no solution, and Jones tells us so indirectly. Phyllis 
does not see her: retreat to Mother is impossible, despite the ghost’s 
adoption of a childlike attitude, represented in the syntax of her thoughts. 
Nor do the multiple repetitions of the name guarantee its applicability to 
herself. In order to identify herself, to turn from actant into actor, she 
needs to do more than be named by a parent. 

Her next step is self-justification. Having convinced herself she is Sally, 


she overhears the other three sisters criticizing her and silently argues with 
them: 


I’m not like that! I’m not hysterical and I don’t go on about my career. I’m 
not like Imogen. They’re just seeing their own faults in me! And I don’t 
grumble and criticise. I’m ever so meek and lowly really—sort of gentle 
and dazed and puzzled about life. (24) 


Real progress begins only as she observes the other girls and starts to 
identify with them each in turn: “Sally found herself saying, Imogen really 
is terribly unhappy! Imogen’s face, with its strong angel features, was 
somehow bloated from behind, with tears she was waiting to cry” (52). 


Then she comes into contact with the living Sally and is startled to find no 
identification: 


She knew the girl was Sally. There had been no mistake there. Yet she had 
no sense of identity with her. She had no idea what this Sally thought and 
felt. She seemed just someone else she was forced to hover and watch, as 
she had watched Sally’s sisters. (87) 


The ghost can only hover and watch because the life of Sally and her 
sisters belongs to a different kind of narrative from her own. Her own 
story, surprisingly, concerns an old, cruel goddess, roused inadvertently 
and allayed only through sacrifice. Theirs, on the other hand, is a thor- 
oughly believable story of squabbles and loyalty among four gifted but 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 77 


neglected sisters and their few allies among the male pupils at their 
parents’ school. Ghost and goddess are pure narrative function; sisters 
and school are portraiture, with very little narrative movement. 

Jones takes these two forms of discourse and forces them to mingle. 
The appearance of the ghost forces a change in the girls’ condition, 
pushing them into the realm of story, where happier endings are possible. 
The ghost’s observation of herself and her sisters (from a vantage point 
seven years in the future, it turns out) gives way to interaction with them. 
She absorbs a measure of their solidity (on a literal as well as figurative 
level, in a scene in which the girls reenact Odysseus’s adventure with the 
shades), and their help wins her freedom from the goddess. 

Kept quietly in the background throughout is a metaphoric level, in 
which spectral existence represents the character’s actual self-effacement. 
One can see the ghost as a role-bound woman: the unnoticed observer, 
powerless, able to act only by influencing those around her, condemned 
always to follow the movements of others. That is, as Jones hints, the life 
the character has been leading for the seven years between the time of the 
haunting and the time she discovers is actually her present moment. Thus, 
her immersion in a story-role represents no great loss of personality; 
instead, the interplay between the two types of characterization allows her 
to break free of societal limitations and, for the first time, become a three- 
dimensional character. 

The structure of Time of the Ghost can help clarify the puzzling 
relationship of character to such concepts as Self and Other or individual 
and group. The ghost character’s main claim to selfhood is her ability to 
report to herself on what she is perceiving and doing. Julian Jaynes, in his 
problematic but fascinating The Origin of Consciousness in the Break- 
down of the Bicameral Mind (1976), suggests that such an act of “nar- 
ratizing” constitutes what we call consciousness: 


consciousness is an operation rather than a thing, a repository, or a 
function. It operates by way of analogy, by way of constructing an analog 
space with an analog “I” that can observe that space, and move metaphor- 
ically in it. It operates on any reactivity, excerpts relevant aspects, nar- 
ratizes and conciliates them together in a metaphorical space where such 
meanings can be manipulated like things in space. (65-66) 


The ghost is such an analog “I,” and the entire narrative is essentially 
the story she tells herself. This is represented stylistically by using for the 
narrative voice what is called indirect free discourse, or quotation of her 
thoughts grammatically converted into third person, with occasional 
direct access marked by italics: 


78 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


She could not even feel anything from the clump of nettles she seemed to 
be standing in. Seemed is the right word, she thought unhappily. Let’s 
face it. ?’'m not just invisible. I haven’t got a body at all. (7) 


The implied narrator of all this—a woman lying in a hospital bed 
seven years hence—is projecting a self, a consciousness, into a fictional 
space that is, nevertheless, real, thanks to the magic. She is delving into 
memory to construct a story that will, as Jaynes says only stories can do, 
conciliate the contradictions of her life, past and present: 


if | ask you to think of a mountain meadow and a tower at the same time, 
you automatically conciliate them by having the tower rising from the 
meadow. But if ] ask you to think of the mountain meadow and an ocean 
at the same time, conciliation tends not to occur and you are likely to 
think of one and then the other. You can only bring them together by a 
narratization. (Jaynes 65) 


The only analog the ghost can construct to represent herself is a 
bodiless, memoryless intelligence—that is one of the conflicts she must 
narrate into resolution. Her projected self lacks a surface with which to 
interact with the world: it is an inside with no outside. Yet she does not 
exist in complete isolation. She is in contact with the common property of 
humanity: language, the ability to narrate, and archetypal motifs such as 
ghost and goddess. She illustrates the paradox discussed earlier: what is 
most completely representative of the individual psyche is also most 
traditional. 

The other characters, though, including her past self, are most recog- 
nizable in their interactions with one another and their environment. 
They exist at the boundary of the Self and the Other. This is where 
physical appearance and gestures occur and where they are noted, where 
language manifests itself as communication or misunderstanding, and 
where the caress or the slap translates the impulses of the Self into 
demonstrations of emotion. 

Without boundaries, there is no distinction between the Self and 
primordial Humanity. In Jones’s terms, the ghost has no way to hide from 
the goddess until she learns to draw the magic circle of identity around 
her Self, and that circle, that identity, is the product of confrontation with 
a community of others. It is their boundary as well as hers; like a bubble in 
a froth, each character is defined by the thin membranes that both join it 
to and separate it from its fellows. These are the complementary con- 
ceptions of character from which Jones has constructed her story. Speak- 
ing first separately and then in dialogue, the two modes of discourse come 
together to create a character linked with both fantasy and mimesis. 





Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 79 


Alan Garner’s characters also begin as pure actants, but in order to 
trace their evolution into a more dialogic conception, we must follow 
Garner’s own development as a writer from The Weirdstone of Bris- 
ingamen (1960) to The Owl Service (1967). 

Garner’s early novels, The Weirdstone of Brisingamen and The Moon 
of Gomrath (1963), both tell of the waking of ancient magic in the 
contemporary countryside of Cheshire, Garner’s home region. In both 
books, two children named Colin and Susan act as the focus for the magic 
and the narrative itself. Around them, wizards, dwarfs, and various other 
figures from English legend struggle and plot for mastery. These super- 
natural characters are divided into teams—good and evil—but there Is 
little sense of what distinguishes the two sides, for neither plays entirely 
fair. The wizard Cadellin is no less willing to use the children as pawns 
than is his evil counterpart (and near twin) Grimnir. 

In The Weirdstone, which Garner later called “a fairly bad book” (“A 
Bit More Practice” 197), all the conventional characters are either car- 
icatures or blanks. The country people of Alderly Edge, like farmer 
Gowther Mossock, speak in thick dialect, they are repositories of ancient 
stories, and they are sturdy and stolid. That is about the extent of their 
characterization. The children speak in a colorless standard English, and 
then only to comment on the action of the story, as if they had no past, no 
interests, no emotions outside of the action going on around them. There 
is a vacuum where the discourse of the actor should be. 

The magical characters, on the other hand, are drawn in simple, bold 
strokes. The Morrigan, for instance, a witch and shape shifter, is the first 
character to warrant a physical description, and Garner’s description 
immediately establishes her as a force in the action: 


She looked about forty-five years old, was powerfully built (“fat” was the 
word Susan used to describe her), and her head rested firmly on her 
shoulders without appearing to have much of a neck at all. Two deep lines 
ran from either side of her nose to the corners of her wide, thin-lipped 
mouth, and her eyes were rather too small for her broad head. Strangely 
enough her legs were thin and spindly, so that in outline she resembled a 
well-fed sparrow. . . . (13) 


We recognize this character, not so much as a realistic portrai”, but as 
a sort of velocity, like an arrow drawn on a map to show the direction of 
traffic. The story is going to go in a certain direction, and the Morrigan is 
going to push it there. Each of the magical beings the children meet is a 
similar vector marker, and the outcome of the story is their sum. 

The most striking characters in the book are those who are most 
completely at the service of story. Cadellin, whose long conversations with 


80 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


the children push him toward actor status, is a rather stiff and con- 
ventional rendering of the wizard archetype. In contrast, beings whose 
purely functional nature is represented by their being given titles rather 
than names—the Morrigan, the Mara—are often vividly original. Like- 
wise, the clumsiness that characterizes Garner’s use of actorial discourse 
disappears when he describes movement and magic, the discourse of the 
actant. 

In The Moon of Gomrath, Garner consolidates his strengths, the 
visualization of fantastic scenes and beings and the economical descrip- 
tion of action, while at the same time beginning to amend his weaknesses. 
In this second book, Susan and Colin are no longer interchangeable, nor 
do they remain unaffected by the action around them, which is itself more 
coherently conceived. 

In contrast with The Weirdstone’s plots and counterplots for posses- 
sion of an amulet in which the audience has very little interest—a Hitch- 
cockian McGuffin—The Moon of Gomrath has a single main sequence of 
action that continually rises in intensity. This means that the actants, as 
well as the actors, are used more effectively, for their respective directional 
pushes add up to a shapelier story. 

In that story, actor and actant begin to work together in dialogue 
fashion, for Susan and, to a lesser extent, Colin find themselves altered 
this time around, as they were not in their previous contact with magic. 
The action begins by picking up a loose thread from the prior story: 
Susan has had to give up her heirloom bracelet, and in exchange the Lady 
of the Lake has given her a silver band with unreadable markings—the 
Mark of Fohla. It is, not surprisingly, a thing of power, and Susan is asked 
.o lend it. Wearing it has marked her, however, and its loss makes her 
vulnerable to attack, which comes in the form of a legendary beast, the 
Brollachan. In horse form, this creature tempts Susan to ride and carries 
her off into the depths of a lake. She returns with wet and weedy hair and 
a hand that feels like a hoof: she is possessed. 

The pattern is repeated: the solution to one problem leads to a new 
danger, each time plunging the children deeper into the world of magic. 
The return of the bracelet to Susan’s wrist casts out the Brollachan, but 
sends her spirit to the realm of the Daughters of the Moon, who wear 
bracelets like hers and who greet her as a sister. Her body, meanwhile, lies 
in a coma. Colin brings her back by gathering a magic flower by moon- 
light, but in doing so wakes the Wild Hunt. None of this makes Cadellin 
happy, for the powers that are being roused are Old Magic, indivisible 
into good and evil, rather than his own intellectual High Magic. He 
describes what has happened to Susan since she put on the bracelet: 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 81 


“She was saved, and is protected, only by the Mark of Fohla—her blessing 
and her curse. For it guards her against the evil that would crush her, and 
it leads her ever further from the ways of human life.” (56) 


Susan does not share his apprehensions: she is eager to learn the 
powers that come with her bracelet. In the end, she rides with the Wild 
Hunt and the Daughters of the Moon to put the Brollachan to flight, and 
would be happy to ride off into legend with them. Her time, though, has 
not yet come: 


But as they crossed the valley, one of the riders dropped behind, and Colin 
saw that it was Susan. She lost ground, though her speed was no less, and 
the light that formed her died, and in its place was a smaller, solid figure 
that halted, forlorn, in the white wake of the riding. (138-39) 


With this curious sour note in an otherwise happy ending, Garner 
found a theme that he developed further in Elidor (1965) and The Owl 
Service. In the former, four children pass from a derelict church in a 
Manchester slum into an enchanted land where they are hailed as proph- 
esied saviors. A successful quest seems to validate the prophecy, but its 
accomplishment only takes a quarter of the book. The remaining and 
more interesting portion concerns their return home, and the strains of 
incorporating the memory of glory into their mundane suburban lives and 
of being heroes in an unheroic age. The dialogue between actor and actant 
grows more poignant when the character is aware of his dialogic nature, 
and that is one key to the success of Elidor and the greater success o 
Garner’s next story. | 

Made up largely of conversation, tightly restricted in setting, anc 
compressed in time, The Owl Service resembles a play. By the time he 
wrote this novel, Garner had mastered the art of making characters reveal 
themselves through speech, gesture, and the other elements of the dis- 
course of the actor. He credits his new facility to a stint of interviewing for 
radio and television: 


This often meant having to condense what somebody spent an hour saying 
into three minutes—without cheating!—preserving the root of what they 
were trying to say. The pressure of this programming meant having to 
listen very very carefully to what was being said. (Wintle and Fisher 230) 


Garner throws his interviewing skills into generating believable, 
sharply individuated, and highly compressed dialogue for his three chief 
characters: Gwyn, Alison, and Roger. Less fully explored but equally 
vivid are Gwyn’s mother Nancy, Roger’s father Clive, and even Alison’s 


82 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


mother Margaret, who is never on stage but who dominates the lives of 
the others. Unlike Garner’s earlier heroes, who seemed to have no ties 
outside of the story, Gwyn and the others represent the intersection of a 
large number of conflicting loyalties. Gwyn is bright, ambitious, poor, 
illegitimate, and Welsh. Roger’s mother abandoned him and his nouveau 
riche, ex-Army father. His father has married Alison’s mother, so they are 
step-siblings trying not to dislike one another. Alison represents old 
money and is, like Roger, English. These factors throw up barriers to the 
communication all three desperately need to establish, especially after 
they find themselves caught up as actants in an ancient story. 

Whereas Garner’s earlier story lines were cobbled together from multi- 
ple sources—local legend, Scandinavian myth, fairy tale—The Owl Ser- 
vice draws on a single source which is explicitly acknowledged in the text. 
It is the tale of Lleu Llaw Gyffes, from the Mabinogion. Lleu, whose 
mother has cursed him so that he can marry neither mortal woman nor 
goddess, is given a bride made of flowers by the wizard Gwydion. The 
beautiful Blodeuwedd, though, betrays her husband with a neighbor, 
Gronw Pebyr, and with him she plots Lleu’s death. Rescued by Gwydion, 
Lleu kills Gronw, and Blodeuwedd is transformed into an owl. Their story 
of love, betrayal, murder, and metamorphosis impinges on the present-day 
narrative when Alison finds a set of plates, the owl service of the title, with 
a floral design that can be rearranged to form owl faces. 

The characters live in the same Welsh valley where Blodeuwedd was 

ated and punished. The forces that came together to produce tragic 

2nd still exist within this small community, in the flowers from which 
sdeuwedd was formed—oak, broom, and meadowsweet—and the pas- 
‘ons that undid her. Dammed up like a mountain stream, these forces 
periodically seek outlet. In every generation, three victims take on the 
roles of husband, wife, and lover. A generation ago, the actants were Huw, 
the half-mad gardener and hereditary lord of the valley; Gwyn’s mother 
Nancy; and Bertram, the cousin from whom Alison’s father inherited the 
estate. Now the roles have shifted, with Huw standing as Gwydion to 
Gwyn’s Lleu and Nancy as Lleu’s vengeful mother, who in the original 
legend denies him name, armor, and a bride until tricked by Gwydion. 

So we have three unremarkable teenagers reenacting a love story of 
heroic proportions, like that of Tristan and Isolde or Arthur and 
Guinevere. The distance between actor and actant is enormous, seemingly 
unbridgeable, and yet Garner convinces us that such an overlay is a valid 
formulation of character. Huw, Alison, and Roger are capable of enacting 
the narrative functions known as Lleu, Blodeuwedd, and Gronw: further- 
more, they know they are doing so, know the tragic outcome implied, and 





Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 83 


are seeking, with all the resources available to them as actors, to prevent 
the cycle from taking its accustomed course. 

They do not have all this knowledge at the beginning, of course. All 
they are aware of is that something strange is happening. The magic seems 
at first to be external to themselves: scrabbling noises in the attic that lead 
them to the flowered plates, Alison’s tracings of the owl pattern that keep 
disappearing, a plaster wall that crumbles away spontaneously to reveal a 
portrait. The twin motifs of owls and flowers recur in every case: the 
woman in the portrait stands against a background of clover; the clover 
heads are made of claws. 

Beauty and half-understood sexual desire alternate with violence, as 
when Roger is bathing in the stream where Lleu’s spear struck Gronw. 
The scene is almost sybaritic at first: 


Roger splashed through the shallows to the bank. A slab of rock stood out 
of the ground close by him, and he sprawled backwards into the foam of 
meadowsweet that grew thickly round its base. He gathered the stems in 
his arms and pulled the milky heads down over his face to shield him from 
the sun. (13) 


But Roger’s dalliance turns surreal when the spear thrown by Lleu cen- 
turies before again pierces the stone behind which Gronw once hid: 


Something flew by him, a blink of dark on the leaves. It was heavy, and 
fast, and struck hard. He felt the vibration through the rock, and he heard 
a scream. 

Roger was on his feet, crouching, hands wide, but the meadow was 
empty, and the scream was gone: he caught its echo in the farmer’s distant 
voice and a curlew away on the mountain. There was no one in sight; his 
heart raced, and he was cold in the heat of the sun. He looked at his hands. 
The meadowsweet had cut him, lining his palm with red beads. The 
flowers stank of goat. (13-14) 


Such incidents supply pieces to the puzzle while helping to convince 
the protagonists that the puzzle is no mere intellectual game. Other clues 
come from Huw, whose madness makes more and more sense-——whose 
Welsh-influenced verb forms, even, help convey the sense of the past 
impinging on the present: 


“There is a man being killed at that place,” said Huw: “old time.” 
“Was there now!” 
“Yes,” said Huw. “He has been taking the other man’s wife.” (33-34) 


84 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


To Huw and the other local residents, there is no question that myth is 
a matter of here and now. The outsiders Alison and Roger, though, and 
even Gwyn, cut off from Jocal culture by his schooling, have a hard time 
believing that their lives are being warped into a pattern they think of as a 
quaint piece of local color. Though they find the text of the legend in a 
book borrowed from Gwyn’s English teacher, it is not until each of them 
experiences firsthand the emotions that led to the original tragedy that 
they begin to have any real understanding of its significance. They learn to 
think of it, as Huw does, in the present tense. 

The supernatural events that occur in the course of the book are 
dramatic but inconclusive. There are no sudden transformations, no 
glowing jewels, no monsters. Alison’s paper owls disappear and are found 
surrounding a stuffed owl in the shed. Her anger shreds a book and sends 
its fragments swarming through the air at Gwyn. Gwyn is led through the 
woods by a will-o’-the-wisp and sees a figure that is not Alison: “The 
figure was still there at the end of the causeway, waiting, under the tree, 
head and shoulders, and arms and the slim body, and then he saw, no less 
clearly, leaves, and branches, thicket and moonlight, and no one waiting” 
(67). Roger takes a photograph through the hole in the stone of Gronw 
and it shows, blurrily, a horseman raising a spear. These events are 
markers of interior changes in the three main characters, glimpses of a 
kind of experience that cannot be told through the discourse of the actor, 
though the outward signs can be shown. 

Garner takes the dialogic nature of character about as far as it can be 
taken; the book’s every scene advances both conceptions at once. It takes 
at least two readings to sort them out, particularly in the early scenes 
yefore all the clues are given. Oftentimes the same descriptive phrase or 
line of speech will function on both levels. The setting itself reflects the 
double nature of the characters. The house is a society in miniature, while 
the valley provides the raw materials for myth: water and weather, flowers 
and feathers, mating and dying. Human beings live in both worlds, 
though some are blind to the latter or excluded from the former. 

As the two forms of existence—actors and actants—draw together, the 
natural world imposes its presence more strongly. In the final scene, the 
house fills with feathers: 


They circled and clung: circled and clung: the owl dance he had found in 
the dust. They were moving on the ceiling and the walls, and he began to 
see the patterns that had followed Huw in the rain: eyes and wings and 
sharpness: winged eyes, yellow, and blackness curved: all in the rafters and 
the wall and the feathers everywhere. (154) 


Fantasy and Narrative Conventions: Character 85 


At the same time, the social reality feeds the magic, because it is keyed 
to the three protagonists who have been chosen to reenact the story: “ ‘She 
is coming, and will use what she finds, and you have only hate in you,’ said 
Huw. ‘Always and always and always’” (155). “She” is Blodeuwedd, not 
just a woman in a story, but a goddess of beauty and cruelty, embodied in 
the natural objects of the valley and in the passions of humans. The beauty 
comes from nature; the cruelty from the admixture of humanity. 

As Garner uses the two forms of characterization, each expands upon 
the other. The realistic characters of Gwyn, Alison, and Roger make the 
reenactment of the legend possible; the legend gives them grandeur. The 
legend says that Gwyn ts not merely a bright, shy, unhappy teenager, but 
also the wronged lord of his Welsh kingdom. It says that Blodeuwedd is 
invoked whenever a young girl blooms into womanhood and that she 
turns dangerous when locked up against her will in someone else’s life. 
Huw, who has already lived through his own cycle, has gained an under- 
standing of the Blodeuwedd within his Nancy: 


She was made for her lord. Nobody is asking her if she wants him. It is 
bitter twisting to be shut up with a person you are not liking very much. I 
think she is often longing for the time when she was flowers on the 
mountain, and it is making her cruel, as the rose is growing thorns. (55) 


The structure of Garner’s book suggests that no character is complete 
until she has encountered her own mythic narrative: the discourse of Mrs. 
Brown, by which we usually identify ourselves as well as those we meet, 
lacks depth and direction without the discourse of Beauty or Blodeuwedd. 
Yet the latter discourse is dangerous, leading to death or madness as easily 
as to a happy ending. Of the three primary characters in The Owl Service, 
Alison is too unformed and Gwyn too deeply wounded to work their way 
through the myth to a resolution. Roger, the least sympathetic through 
most of the action, proves to be the one able to learn from his role and 
thus to divert the story from its apparently inevitable end. Something in 
his ordinary past experience enables him to take hold of the power of the 
myth, and, as Huw says, “leash it, yet set it free . . . so that no one else 
may suffer” (135). 

The Owl Service suggests that the number of ways the discourse of 
actants can interact with that of actors is limitless, that each combination 
will result in a different formulation. When Huw becomes Llew Llaw 
Gyffes, the result is not the same as when he later plays the part of 
Gwydion. Gwyn’s version of Llew is something else again. Yet in each 
case, the pattern that emerges from the dialogue illuminates both ele- 
ments. The archetypal role may end up effacing the actor or disappearing 


86 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


under the weight of the actor’s traits, or the two may strike a balance, as 
Patricia McKillip’s Star-Bearer does. No matter what the result, an impor- 
tant component has been restored to the concept of character. 

In the stories that combine literary greatness with popular appeal, 
from the Odyssey to Great Expectations, characters are both determiners 
of and subservient to the action. The pleasure is in seeing believable 
analogs of humanity acting out the patterns of fairy tale or myth. The 
more realistic the discourse of the actor, the more strongly we identify 
with his shock or pleasure at finding himself transformed into actant. 
Fiction that arbitrarily foregoes the possibility of such transformation— 
fiction with no heroes, helpers, or villains—gains verisimilitude at the 
expense of psychological and philosophical range. 

These fantasies echo the old and recently rediscovered truth that only 
through such narrative structures can we define ourselves and our rela- 
tionships with others. From our first “memories,” which are not infre- 
quently constructed from anecdotes told to us by family members 
(Baldwin), to the narrative constructions through which the psychoana- 
lytic subject presents himself to the analyst or the testifying churchgoer to 
God, we examine our experiences and our characters by dropping them 
into the stream of a story and seeing where they wash ashore. Writers of 
fantasy reflect this process when they set up the dialogue of actor and 
actant. Its mixed parentage—fairy tale on the mother’s side, realistic 


fiction on the father’s—gives fantasy a unique ability to investigate the 
twofold process of constructing a self. 


SIX 


Women’s Coming of Age 
in Fantasy 


A STRENGTH AND A WEAKNESS of fantasy is its reliance on traditional 
storytelling forms and motifs. By making its conventional basis explicit 
and primary, rather than submerging traditional tale types or character 
functions beneath a surface of apparent reported reality, fantasy is em- 
powered to reimagine both character and story, as we have seen. But a 
willingness to return to the narrative structures of the past can entail as 
well an unquestioning acceptance of its social structures. 

This danger is particularly evident when the inherited story focuses on 
the process of coming of age, the transition from immature individual to 
mature member of society. In the societies from which we derive our 
legacy of myths and fairy tales, coming of age was a process of accom- 
modating oneself to a strictly defined social role: hunter, chieftain, 
farmer, king. The passage from childhood to adult status was generally 
marked by the enactment of rituals which not only marked the individ- 
ual’s transition but also at the same time reaffirmed the hierarchical order 
in which the newly adult member was to find a place. Sometimes accom- 
panying the rituals and sometimes serving in their place were spoken 
narratives. These told of a young hero’s displacement, transformation, and 
return—the fundamental pattern of both the hero monomyth, as de- 
scribed by Joseph Campbell, and of the fairy tale, as analyzed by Vladimir 
Propp. 

We see this pattern reproduced in some form in virtually every modern 


87 


88 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


fantasy. For example, in Lloyd Alexander’s Chronicles of Prydain (1964- 
68) an orphaned young man discovers a destiny, true love, and his identity. 
T. H. White’s The Sword in the Stone (1938) describes the transformation 
of the child Wart into King Arthur. The title character of Le Guin’s A 
Wizard of Earthsea (1968) matures by testing his powers and learning his 
own limits. Tolkien describes the way an amiable young hobbit grows into 
a heroic and somber figure. George MacDonald’s Phantastes (1858) 
concerns a youth who wakes up in a room transformed into woodland 
and undergoes a series of tests and adventures that lead him to self 
knowledge. Each of these coming-of-age stories reflects traditional 
sources, such as the tale-type known as the “sorcerer’s apprentice,” on 
which the second example is partially modeled. From the earliest tradi- 
tional fairy tales to the most recent fantasy novels, protagonists have 
moved from the end of childhood (or at least a condition of unformedness) 
to adulthood as the story unfolds. The magical adventures are tied to- 
gether and the story given shape by the hero’s gradual assumption of his 
proper powers and his place in society. 

Each of the protagonists referred to above—Taran Wanderer, Wart, 
Ged, Frodo, and Anodos—is male. That’s not surprising; a majority of the 
central figures in fiction are male, reflecting cultural biases and the 
prevalence of men in the ranks of writers. But the creator of one of those 
characters is a woman. The treatment of the coming-of-age story by 
women writers such as Ursula K. Le Guin demonstrates how a tradition 
may be made to reflect contemporary concerns, and how inherited story 
structures may be used to question the practices and beliefs that gave rise 
to them. 

Le Guin chose the young man Ged as the hero of her first major 
fantasy A Wizard of Earthsea. Not until the second book of her trilogy, 
The Tombs of Atuan (1971), did she explore directly the coming of age of 

young woman. The experience of that character, Arha, is significantly 
ifferent from that of Ged, whom we may take as typical of the male hero. 
sed begins in obscurity but soon attracts attention for his native gifts in 
sorcery, leaves the domestic world of his aunt’s house, undergoes an 
apprenticeship under a (male) master who gives him a new name, attends 
a school for wizards (all male), disobeys an injunction, wanders the world 
looking for a cure for the evil he has unleashed, is tempted by a (female) 
witch, bests a dragon in a test of wits, and finally overcomes the evil. 
Ambitious, proud, and impulsive, he must learn the limits of his powers. 
His only real adversary is himself, and his chief accomplishment is self- 
mastery. 
For Arha, however, the problem is unleashing rather than mastering 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 89 


herself, and outside rather than within the institutional constraints of her 
culture. Accordingly, for Le Guin the problem is to find a way of adapting 
the conventions of fantasy to reflect this other kind of coming of age. Her 
solution, drawing upon her knowledge of earlier narratives and of anthro- 
pological studies of rites of passage, is to create a new assemblage, with 
new meanings, out of existing materials. Other women writers in turn 
have learned from her techniques. Like the women’s art of quilting, 
fantasy writing is a cooperative enterprise, in which individual vision is 
expressed within prescribed forms, and innovation is an outgrowth of the 
process of continuity. 

A large proportion of contemporary fantasy fiction is written by 
women. Patricia McKillip, Diana Wynne Jones, Susan Cooper, R. A. 
MacAvoy, and dozens of other writers have found fantasy—with its con- 
ventions derived from fairy tale, romance, supernatural legend, and 
myth—to be an appropriate vehicle for conveying the ideas and experi- 
ences they have found significant enough to work into narrative form. 
These writers and the women who explored the mode of fantasy before 
them constitute a tradition of a new sort. Thelma Shinn’s Worlds within 
Women (1986) and Charlotte Spivack’s Merlin’s Daughters (1987) both 
describe the thematic consistency within contemporary fantastic literature 
by women: drawing on common experiences and knowledge of one 
another’s work, women fantasists are engaged in such joint enterprises as 
refurbishing the archetypal images of the goddess, redefining the qualities 
of heroism to include female experience, and reaffirming women’s access 
to the narrative storehouse of the past. 

Shinn suggests that the marginal status of the fantastic within our 
culture makes it analogous to earlier orally transmitted materials of myth: 
“these ephemeral publications which go out of print quickly and into 
imaginative retellings easily are as close to an oral tradition as can be 
found in the larger contemporary society” (189-90). Within a popular art 
form such as fantasy, even non-formulaic works play off one another, 
borrowing freely and following up implications from earlier texts. In this 
way, the body of modern fantasy—and this is true of fantasy by men as 
well—comes to resemble a mythology: that is, a compilation of narratives 
that expresses a society’s conception of itself, its individual members, and 
their place in the universe. 

Coming of age is central in any mythology. Like all rites of passage or 
of initiation, it marks the passage of an individual from one state to 
another: from one tribe to another, from the laity to the priesthood, from 
life to death, or, in this case, from childhood to adulthood and full 
participation in society. Arnold van Gennep, whose 1908 study of Les 





90 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


rites de passage stands behind most popular treatments of the subject and 
thus shapes the way we continue to think of it, treats these rites as 
essentially concerned with changes of status in males: 


Transitions from group to group and from one social situation to the next 
are looked on as implicit in the very fact of existence, so that a man’s life 
comes to be made up of a succession of stages with similar ends and 
beginnings: birth, social puberty, marriage, fatherhood, advancement to a 
higher class, occupational specialization, and death. (3) 


This one-sided emphasis on “a man’s life,” ignoring a woman’s, prob- 
ably reflects both van Gennep’s own bias and that of the cultures he is 
examining. Until recently, few ethnologists would have thought to look 
for women’s rituals, and unless fieldworkers were themselves women, 
much of women’s culture was inaccessible to them. Van Gennep’s study 
primarily documents male activities from birth to grave, discussing 
women only in conjunction with pregnancy, childbirth, and marriage, 
and the last with respect to the man’s acquisition of a wife. Mircea Eliade, 
in his Rites and Symbols of Initiation (1958), has more to say about 
female initiation, but he points out that such rituals typically lack the 
element of spiritual revelation present in the puberty rites of boys, being 
more concerned with marking the onset of menstruation and other such 
physical changes (47). 

Do women come of age? In van Gennep’s ' view perhaps not, for he 
considers women and children to form a single social group. Boys require 
a drastic break from this group to that of adult men; girls merely work 
their way through it. The further implication is that women never do 
become fully adult, that they are like those salamanders that stay under- 
water all their lives, able to reproduce but otherwise still in the gill- 
breathing, immature stage. 

More recent studies, such as those summarized in Bruce Lincoln’s 
Emerging from the Chrysalis (1981), suggest that women’s initiation rites 
may actually outnumber men’s (Lincoln 3), but that the nature of those 
rites is different enough from the anthropologist’s conceptual model to 
have been dismissed as trivial or nonexistent. Van Gennep hypothesized a 
three-step process as basic to all rites of passage: separation of the candi- 
date from the community, a period of ordeals and instruction, and rein- 
corporation into the community under a new identity (Lincoln roo). In 
women’s rituals, however, “something different seems to be at work, and 
in place of van Gennep’s terms | would suggest three others: enclosure, 
metamorphosis (or magnification), and emergence” (Lincoln ror). Char- 
acteristically, the adolescent girl is secluded within her own home, often in 
an inner room, at or before her first menstruation. There she is considered 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 91 


to take on the identity of a culture heroine or goddess, like the Navajo 
Changing Woman (Lincoln 24); often the incarnation is marked by 
special costume. When she emerges into society, she renews the gifts of 
fertility and order originally brought by the mythic figure she represents. 

But such rituals are not widely known; some are not even recognized 
by the societies in which they occur as equivalent to male initiations 
(Lincoln 35). Thus the belief that they do not exist continues to prevail 
even in scholarly circles. Carolyn Heilbrun reflects the general view when 
she suggests that women even in our own culture have no coming-of-age 
ritual and that they pay a psychological penalty for the lack: 


All societies, from the earliest and most primitive to today’s, have cere- 
moniously taken the boy from the female domain and urged his identity as 
a male, as a responsible unfeminine individual, upon him. The girl under- 
goes no such ceremony, but she pays for serenity of passage with a lack of 
selfhood and of the will to autonomy that only the struggle for identity 
can confer. (104) 


A fantasy writer can invent a ritual for herself, holding her own 
imaginative initiation ceremony. But she faces limitations not faced by her 
male counterparts. If she is aware of the female rites of passage that do 
exist, she may not be content to induct her characters into the female roles 
to which those rites lead. The challenge she faces is to retain the values of 
the female initiation—its bestowal of identity and mystery upon the 
initiand—without turning her characters into tribal mothers and drudges. 
To do so, she must turn to other models from life and literature. 

However, such models have long been difficult to find, especially i1 
print. Copying the male initiation story with a female protagonist is on 
solution, but an inadequate one if the writer wishes to connect with 
women’s actual experience in our culture. Few women even today can find 
in their own lives any analog of the male hero’s freedom of movement or 
his expectation of power and rank at the, end of his quest. An effective 
female initiation fantasy should be, at least at the beginning, more recog- 
nizably grounded in the biological and social reality of a woman’s life, but 
in the course of events it should somehow transcend that reality. 

The mainstream novel of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
mirrors social realities, but it has no mechanism for transcending them. 
For this reason, it has little to offer women in the way of successful 
transitions to maturity. Beginning with Samuel Richardson’s influential 
creations, youthful women in such novels are generally confined to two 
fates. They marry, like Pamela, or die, like Clarissa. Either fate ends the 
heroine’s development. 

One should note that this limitation applies only to stories of young 


92 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


women: there is a large class of fiction that “shows women developing 
later in life, after conventional expectations of marriage and motherhood 
have been fulfilled and found insufficient” (Abel 7). In fantasies, such 
middle-aged emergence has been well treated by Nancy Kress in The 
Prince of Morning Bells (1981) and by Le Guin in Tehanu (1990). Yet a 
coming-of-age story requires an adolescent hero, of the sort so prevalent 
in fiction by men. Patricia Meyer Spacks asks rhetorically where one can 
find female equivalents for Stephen Dedalus or Holden Caulfield and 
answers that one cannot, because of restrictions placed on independent 
young women: 


Female rebellion may be perfectly justified, but there’s no good universe 
next door, no way out, young potential revolutionaries can’t find their 
revolution. So they marry in defeat or go mad in a complicated form of 
triumph, their meaning the inevitability of failure. (158) 


Realistic fiction is limited in two ways. First, it can find no “good 
universe next door.” It is limited to the circumstances of the recognizable 
world, in which women have, or have had, little outlet for revolutionary or 
artistic impulses. Second, it is surprisingly limited in available plot lines. 
Marriage and madness or suicide correspond to the dramatic formulas of 
the comic and the tragic. These formulaic constraints exerted such con- 
trol over nineteenth-century novelists that Jane Austen, who herself never 
married, ended every novel with multiple marriages, while George Eliot, 
kate Chopin, and Edith Wharton, who all reached artistic success and a 

easure of economic independence, wrote of women unable to forge new 
cial roles and driven thereby to untimely deaths. 

Both formulas can, of course, result in profound and original fiction. 
xachel Brownstein points out that the marriage plot, if well handled, can 
be used to show “how very odd it is to choose another so as to choose a 
self” (xvii). The heroine’s selection of a proper husband may be overlaid 
with wit and social commentary, as in Pride and Prejudice, or laden with 
ethical implication, as in Middlemarch. Nonetheless, it does not show 
how a woman can become a self, independent of her choice of mate. It is 
still the story of Cinderella, waiting for the fulfillment that comes only 
with the right man. In a way, the realist marriage plot is worse than 
“Cinderella,” for without the markers of fictionality—most notably 
magic—that are built into the fairy tale, we are encouraged to take these 
equally arbitrary story structures as reality. 

Cinderella, along with her sisters Snow White and the Sleeping Beauty, 
has given fairy tales the reputation of being, for women, indoctrinations in 
passivity. These most familiar of fairy tale heroines all undergo intervals of 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 93 


confinement, metamorphosis, and reemergence as prospective wives to 
the more active male figures. Their rites of passage are striking echoes of 
those described by anthropologists, and arrive at the same ends, limiting 
their usefulness as models for fantasy. 

Yet not all fairy tales involve heroines like Sleeping Beauty. A sizable 
minority of traditional tales describe a courageous, independent heroine 
winning her own way and reaching adulthood in the process. In Joseph 
Jacobs's collection English Folk and Fairy Tales, for instance, the follow- 
ing tales have young female protagonists: “Tom Tit Tot,” “Nix Nought 
Nothing,” “Cap o’Rushes,” “Mollie Whuppie,” “Mr. Fox,” “Earl Mar’s 
Daughter,” “The Fish and the Ring,” “Kate Crackernuts,” “The Well of 
the World’s End,” and “The Three Heads of the Well.” The heroines of 
these tales outwit devils, kill giants, work enchantments, work for a 
living, unmask false suitors, and rescue siblings. The princess in “The 
Three Heads of the Well” does not wait around to be rescued from an evil 
stepmother; instead, “The young princess having lost her father’s love, 
grew weary of the Court, and one day, meeting with her father in the 
garden, she begged him, with tears in her eyes, to let her go and seek her 
fortune. . .” (232-33). 

The unfamiliarity of tales like these is the result of a process of 
selection by fairy tale collectors, retellers, and editors that amounts to 
suppression of the independent female hero. 

In the brothers Grimm’s collection, which already represents a consid- 
erable editorial bias in favor of bourgeois domesticity for female charac- 
ters, there remain nonetheless a handful of active heroines—which later 
popularizations have proceeded to weed out. 


Very few translations offer more than twenty-five tales, and thus only a 
handful of heroines is usually included. Most of them run the gamut from 
mildly abused to severely persecuted. In fact, a dozen docile heroines are 
the overwhelming favorites, reappearing in book after book from the mid- 
nineteenth century to the present. (Stone 43) 


Academic folklorists have also contributed to the invisibility of the 
female hero. Stith Thompson’s Motif Index of Folk Literature (1958) and 
Thompson and Antti Aarne’s The Types of the Folktale (1961) illustrate a 
number of ways in which a supposedly objective system of classification 
may conceal bias. Passive verbs and nominalizations hide a number of 
enterprising women, so that, for instance, a tale-type with a female hero is 
listed by Aarne and Thompson as “The search for the lost husband” 
(Type 425), while the equivalent story with genders reversed is called “The 
man on a quest for his lost wife” (Type 400) (Lundell 154-55). The 


94 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


heroine’s activity may even be credited to her lover, as in Type 300: “The 
boy rescues the princess through her magic power: She changes herself 
into a golden bird” (Lundell 157). 

Whatever conception of female coming of age may once have been 
conveyed in the folktales of Europe can therefore only be imaginatively 
reconstructed. The evidence is hopelessly skewed, and much of it irre- 
coverable. 

Nevertheless, the power of the folktale as narrative pattern is such that 
women readers and writers have devised strategies to regain it as a tool for 
the exploration of their own experience. Carolyn Heilbrun suggests one 
such strategy in the reader’s refusal to limit her identification to the 
passive heroine, her discovery “that she is not confined to the role of the 
princess; that the hero, who wakens Sleeping Beauty with a kiss, is that 
part of herself that awakens conventional girlhood to the possibility of life 
and action” (150). 

Heilbrun’s approach is an effective one for some readers but may not 
be workable for all, especially young girls untrained in the art of reading 
subversively. Another tack is the sort of reverse discrimination practiced by 
editors like Ethel Johnston Phelps, whose Tatterbood and Other Tales 
(1978) assembles stories from many cultures, all featuring “heroic women 
distinguished by extraordinary courage and achievements, who hold the 
center of interest in the tales” (xv). It may be that these two approaches 
reinforce one another: as readers become more familiar with nonpassive 
neroines, they find it easier to identify with active characters of either sex. 

A third strategy is the invention of original stories drawing on the 

iotifs and structures of the traditional tale but introducing reversals of 
xpected character roles. One of the first such stories is Jean Ingelow’s 
largely forgotten but haunting Mopsa the Fairy (1869). 

Ingelow was best known in her day as a poet. A friend of Browning, 
Ruskin, and Christina Rossetti, she seems to have shared their interest in 
the fairy tale as an alternative form of symbolic expression. Her only 
novel-length fairy tale, Mopsa the Fairy, reveals in its plot and symbolism 
some of the tensions between cultural expectations for women in the 
Victorian era and the aspirations of a woman writer. Many of these 
narrative and symbolic patterns continue to appear in fantasies by women 
a century later. 

Ingelow’s story is told primarily from the point of view of Jack, an 
ordinary little boy who happens one day to find a nest of fairies in a 
hollow tree. The four tiny fairies inside begin as infants but mature very 
quickly, all except for Mopsa, the one Jack kisses. She remains a child, but 
grows to human stature and is the only one to remain with Jack as he 
travels to fairyland. Jack passes through various strange realms, does a few 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 95 


good deeds, and meets a fairy queen. Throughout the story, Jack remains 
very much as he began, a polite and adventurous child. Mopsa, however, 
changes a great deal. 

Once in the realm of the fairy queen, she matures very rapidly. She 
grows to Jack’s height, begins to understand things that are mysteries to 
Jack, and initiates a sisterly rivalry with the queen. Because there cannot 
be two queens in one fairyland, the queen conveys a message from her 
mother (whose name is Fate) that Mopsa is to go rule a land where the 
fairies are condemned to wear the shapes of deer. Mopsa rebels, because 
she has heard that those fairies keep their queen imprisoned in a tower, 
and she and Jack flee. Finally they come, by accident, to the country of the 
deer, and Mopsa realizes that they want her not as a prisoner but as their 
deliverer. She acquiesces, and she and Jack undo the spell. The deer regain 
their human form, and their young prince, in honor of their rescuers, 
becomes Jack’s exact double. Mopsa stays on to rule in her country and 
perhaps eventually to marry the fairy Jack. The original Jack goes home to 
his family. 

What does all this say about a Victorian woman’s coming of age? First, 
Ingelow uses a male protagonist to initiate her plot. Alice in Wonderland 
notwithstanding, adventures were for boys. For the first half of the book, 
our interest is primarily with Jack. Second, Mopsa does not become 
queen because of her royal birth or her innate qualities, but because Jack 
has kissed her: the older queen explains that “the love of a mortal works 
changes indeed. It is not often that we win anything so precious” (280). It 
is almost impossible not to read “man” for “mortal.” The woman begins 
as something alien, a smaller imitation of a human, and only through love 
comes to humanity. 

Third, the relationship between woman and girl is one of nurturing 
only until the girl grows close to womanhood and then it changes to 
rivalry. “I don’t love the Queen,” says Mopsa; “She slapped my arm as she 
went by, and it hurts” (294). That slap is very interesting. The red mark it 
leaves proves that Mopsa is indeed on her way to becoming a queen, for 
ordinary fairies have no red blood. The incident strongly suggests the slap 
often given to girls at their first menstrual cycle—one of the few ritual acts 
marking a girl’s physical maturation in contemporary American society. 
In both cases, the implied message is that maturation for girls is accom- 
panied by shame and the hostility of older women. 

Fourth, Mopsa has no reliable mentor to aid her in her struggle for 
independence. The fairy queen is more frightening than helpful, even 
when giving advice: “when everyone had finished, the Queen leaned her 
arm on the edge of the boat and, turning her lovely face towards Mopsa, 
said: ‘I want to whisper to you, sister.’ ‘Oh!’ said Mopsa. ‘I wish I was in 


96 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Jack’s waistcoat pocket again; but I’m so big now.’ And she took hold of 
the two sides of his velvet jacket, and hid her face between them” (304). 
The old apple-woman, a mortal kept by the queen as a companion, sets 
Mopsa on the wrong path entirely by passing on a false rumor about the 
deer-shaped fairies. Only when Mopsa has essentially reached her matu- 
rity does she find a wise female friend. 

Fifth, whatever women need to know, they know without having to 
learn it. Furthermore, their knowledge is beyond logic: “Mopsa, however, 
was like other fairies in this respect—that she knew all about Old Mother 
Fate, but not about causes and reasons” (328). But when women try to tell 
what they know—first the queen and then Mopsa tell prophesying sto- 
ries—everyone falls asleep. 

Sixth, maturity for a woman involves acceptance of fate. Mopsa must 
reign where she is fated to reign, and any amount of wandering will only 
take her there in the end. 

Laid out thus, the points Ingelow is making sound profoundly anti- 
feminist. That is not exactly the effect of the story, however. It may be read 
as saying that society does indeed place blocks in the path of a young 
woman who aspires to individuality, but that the determined heroine may 
overcome them. Mopsa, who begins as an ordinary young fairy, orphaned 
or abandoned, ends up as a queen, wiser and more humane than the fairy 
queen whose land she flees. 

The story begins with Jack, but Mopsa and her fate are far more 
interesting. Jack seems to serve primarily as an avenue into the realm of 

he fairy tale, a conventional fairy-tale hero with a conventional name. 
since more people seem to be aware of male-oriented tales than of the 
“Mollie Whuppie” sort of fairy tale, perhaps Ingelow thought the form 
required someone like Jack. Hers is not the only fantasy by a woman to 
begin from a male point of view. As mentioned earlier, Le Guin wrote one 
book about a male wizard before looking at the coming-of-age process 
from a female viewpoint. Patricia Wrightson’s The Ice Is Coming (1977) 
and Patricia McKillip’s The Riddle-Master of Hed (1976) also have male 
heroes, with female counterparts not appearing until the sequels. 

What all these writers seem to be doing is reinforcing a reading like 
that suggested by Heilbrun for fairy tales: the male who acts as catalyst for 
the female’s transformation is also, in a sense, herself. He represents those 
impulses toward independent action and self-definition which society 
insists the young girl suppress. Since those qualities are culturally defined 
as masculine, they must enter the story in male guise, but the outcome is 
the redefinition of the female. By the end, the heroine has grown to 
encompass his qualities as well as her own “masculine” initiative and 
“feminine” wisdom. 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy oF 


Virginia Woolf’s fantasy Orlando (1928) is structured in a way that 
illustrates another narrative function for this device. Woolf’s hero, Or 
lando, is male for the first half of the book, and then inexplicably changes 
to female. The result is that the reader is unable thereafter to view the 
female Orlando in the way he is accustomed to viewing female characters. 
We are already used to seeing Orlando travel, fight, create, fall in love, fall 
out of love, and so on; it is no use suddenly to start expecting him/her to 
become passive, mysterious, and secondary. The heroes of Le Guin’s, 
Wrightson’s, and McKillip’s fantasies are male because we have come to 
expect the heroes of the sort of book they are in to be male. However, like 
Orlando, Le Guin’s Ged and the others are androgynous enough that 
their creators can, through them, express general ideas about youth and 
its trials and discoveries. Then once the fantasy world is established, the 
writer may choose to explore the special experience of women in it. 

Andre Norton, whose Witch World series waited until its third vol- 
ume, Year of the Unicorn (1965), for a full-fledged female hero, explains 
why the unexamined choice of protagonist, even for a woman writer, 
might be male—audience expectations: 


To write a full book from the feminine point of view was a departure. | 
found it fascinating to write, but the reception was oddly mixed. In the 
years now since [Year of the Unicorn] was published I have had many 
letters from women readers who accepted Gillian with open arms, and | 
have had masculine readers who hotly resented her. (“On Writing Fan- 
tasy” 161) 


Only when the coming of age includes sexuality does it becom 
absolutely necessary to split the androgynous hero into male and female. 
Le Guin, speaking of the second book in the Earthsea trilogy, associates 
femininity with the sort of physical changes that were mostly left out of A 
Wizard of Earthsea: 


The subject of The Tombs of Atuan is, if | had to put it in one word, sex. 
There’s a lot of symbolism in the book, most of which I did not, of course, 
analyze consciously while writing; the symbols can all be read as sexual. 
More exactly, you could call it a feminine coming of age. Birth, rebirth, 
destruction, freedom are the themes. (Language 55) 


For the same reasons, Ingelow begins with Jack and moves to Mopsa 
when things get interesting. His kiss calls Mopsa to her fate, which then 
becomes the real subject of the book. The same pattern reappears in the 
work of more recent fantasists. In The Tombs of Atuan, published just 
about a century after Ingelow’s novel, the protagonist Arha is raised as 


98 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


priestess of the Nameless Ones, dark, inhuman forces worshipped by her 
society. Her education is designed to suppress or destroy her individual 
personality and make her an empty vehicle for the gods she serves. When 
the wizard Ged arrives, he restores her humanity and individuality by 
giving her back the name she was born with, Tenar. That is the beginning 
of her rebellion and maturation. Again the male character initiates a 
transformation in the female, from alien to human. 

Another meaning for the male catalyst emerges in Patricia Wrightson’s 
The Dark Bright Water (1979). In that book, the hero from The Ice Is 
Coming, a young Aborigine named Wirrun, meets many of the creatures 
from his people’s folklore, among them the Yunggamurra. This is a sort of 
fresh-water siren, a beautiful woman-shaped singer that lures men to their 
deaths. The Yunggamurra is not evil; her main interest is not killing men 
but playing in the water with her sisters. The siren song is a game she 
plays. After she drowns Wirrun’s friend Ularra, Wirrun finds out the other 
rule of the game: he catches her in the smoke of a grass-fire and she is 
transformed from silvery water spirit to golden mortal woman: trapped, 
tamed, humanized. 

Wrightson is making use of a traditional motif here: the swan-maiden, 
seal-maiden, or similar spirit creature caught by the human male, there- 
upon becoming his bride. But Wrightson’s perspective on the story gives it 
a different significance. The transformed Yunggamurra, now named 
Murra, loves Wirrun, but she regrets her lost life: “to flow with the water 

nd ride it; to be one strand among weeds, one voice in the singing. To 

ise to the sun or sink from the wind as the others do. To be no one but to 
be many, and to play” (216). She has given up a wild, anonymous freedom 
for a name and a lover. 

It is an exchange Murra makes against her will, but she is willing to 
abide by it. However, she warns Wirrun that he must keep her away from 
water, where her sisters might find her: “They will call and call and I will 
hear and hear; and one day they will find me in water. They will catch 
Murra more surely than ever you caught Yunggamurra. They will take me 
back to the rivers and the games and I will be Yunggamurra again. You 
should keep me always from the water” (220). 

Read as metaphor, Murra’s transformation is from child to woman. 
Children are wild and free. They are anonymous insofar as adults fail to 
distinguish among them, and their identities are not fixed but fluid, 
responding to everything around them. A girl-child looking at her mother 
sees someone bounded by convention and tied to the needs of husband 
and children. Girl and woman might as well be different species. If the 
mother was once a girl, she must have been trapped and transformed. The 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 29 


magic spell that will do the same to her, society informs the girl, is called 
love. 

That is one possible meaning for all these stories of witch, fairy, or 
animal turned into woman. In many of the traditional tales, the woman is 
mistreated and goes back to her old life. The man has caught her, but he 
does not have her soul. In a patriarchal society, that is as free as a woman 
can be. She accepts the bargain, lives a circumscribed life, bears her 
children, and becomes an adult according to her culture’s dictates, but she 
retains an escape clause. 

In The Dark Bright Water, Wirrun admirably refuses to play the 
game. He won’t keep Murra locked up away from water; she is now 
human and must stay with him or go by her own choice. He has not 
sought a subservient wife but an equal companion. Much of the third 
volume of the trilogy concerns Murra’s coming to terms with a rela- 
tionship not covered by the magical game. 

Jean Ingelow’s fantasy does not take up such adult dilemmas, but 
Jack’s kiss of Mopsa carries some of the same implications. Jack himself is 
unaware of the effect of his attentions, since men are not caught in the 
same way women are. By the end of the book, Mopsa has outgrown Jack 
(though Ingelow describes her as looking only ten years old—she has 
more growing to do). She has moved on to a new realm of knowledge and 
responsibility. Her last act in the story is to give Jack back his kiss and send 
him on his way home. She has accepted womanhood, but she does not tie 
herself to the one who triggered her transformation. 

Mopsa had no older woman to guide her to maturity. The image o: 
older woman as threatening rival rather than as mentor is familiar to us 
from “Hansel and Gretel” and “Snow White.” This image may derive 
from the fact that mother and daughter must compete for favors from a 
dominant male. It also reflects the daughter’s awareness that the mother is 
“in on it”’—she is one of the forces pushing the girl into the constricting 
mold of female adulthood. In The Tombs of Atuan, Le Guin shows older 
women in the latter role. The priestess Kossil is as fearsome as any fairy- 
tale stepmother. She is ambitious, cruel, and hypocritical, and she resents 
the young priestess of the Nameless Ones, her only peer. Arha must reach 
adulthood literally over Kossil’s dead body, when the latter is trapped in 
the caverns of the Nameless Ones. 

Raederle, the heroine of Patricia McKillip’s Heir of Sea and Fire 
(1977), has both positive and negative role models among older women. 
The old pig-woman, who is really the wizard Nun in disguise (MckKillip’s 
wizards can be female), gives her friendship and instruction in the magical 
arts. On the other hand, the shapechanger Eriel attacks Raederle’s lover 


100 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Morgon and taunts Raederle with the idea that Raederle will eventually 
become as ruthless as she. Both are magicians, and both are kin to 
Raederle. Nun represents the mother Raederle would like to be like; Eriel 
is the mother she dreads becoming. Raederle’s own mother is dead, and so 
the story of her coming of age is also the story of her search for an 
acceptable maternal model, just as many male fantasy heroes are looking 
for fathers. In addition, Raederle’s shapechanger heritage echoes the 
common fantasy treatment of women as alien creatures until they are 
tamed by love. 

Raederle’s problem is learning to accept and control the powers she 
was born with, whereas her male counterpart Morgon must learn his 
powers step by step. This distinction between acquired and inborn ability 
or knowledge marks many fantasies by and about women. As mentioned 
earlier, Mopsa begins to know things spontaneously when she reaches a 
certain level of maturity, and this knowledge is of a sort that cannot be 
explained to Jack. The fantasies are here echoing a common perception of 
women as intuitive, men as logical. 

Michelle Zimbalist Rosaldo, examining this idea in a cultural context, 
suggests two explanations. Women’s knowledge is perceived as illogical 
and unsystematic, she suggests, because cultures do not develop complex 
categories for women’s activities as they do for men’s: “It is because men 
enter the world of articulated social relations that they appear to us as 
intellectual, rational, or instrumental; and the fact that women are ex- 
cluded from that world makes them seem to think and behave in another 
mode” (30). Women appear to acquire their knowledge spontaneously 
secause they have been learning it by imitation since infancy, whereas “a 
man’s experience lacks this continuity; he may be wrenched from the 
domestic sphere in which he spent his earliest years, by means of rituals or 
Initiations that teach him to distrust or despise the world of his mother, to 
seek his manhood outside the home” (28). 

Although women in fantasies are represented as possessing this intui- 
tive understanding, to rely entirely on such knowledge would leave them 
reproducing the lives of their mothers. Some additional knowledge 1s 
required if the cycle is to be broken, and, since men have always had to 
break away from the maternal world, the female heroes of fantasy borrow 
knowledge from them. Already knowing of continuity, duty, and the 
submersion of the self, they must learn of individuality and rebellion; 
hence Ged gives to the priestess Arha (translated as “the eaten one”) her 
birth name of Tenar. Hence Wirrun gives to the Yunggamurra, who has 
no identity distinct from her race, the individual name of Murra. 

Armed with a double knowledge, these heroes can grow into mature, 
independent women, sometimes into magic-workers and queens. They 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 101 


are free to choose their roles, although they may have been fated to those 
roles all along, as Mopsa was fated to rule over her realm. If she had 
merely acquiesced in her fate and gone meekly to the land of the fairies 
who had been turned into deer, they would never have been freed from 
their enchantment. The spell required that “They were to remain in the 
disguise of deer till a queen of alien birth should come to them against her 
will” (328). Mopsa’s rebellion made her the queen they needed. 

In a few very recent works, women characters come of age in ways 
different from that mapped out in Mopsa the Fairy. No male characters 
are required to initiate the plots of Diana Wynne Jones’s The Spell-coats 
(1979), Virginia Hamilton’s Justice and Her Brothers (1978), Michaela 
Roessner’s Walkabout Woman (1988), and Suzette Haden Elgin’s Ozark 
trilogy (1981). Nor are their women characters portrayed as something 
other than human to begin with, though they may grow into something 
greater than human. 

Responsible of Brightwater, the heroine of Elgin’s trilogy, is on center 
stage from the beginning. She needs no man to teach her independence. 
Fourteen years old at the beginning of the series, she possesses an adoles- 
cent self-assurance not always short of arrogance. She has her magical 
powers well in hand and is fully supplied with female mentors in the 
persons of the Grannys [sic] who run households on the planet Ozark. 
Ozark society is organized in a fashion derived from its earthly namesake: 
men and women inhabit largely separate spheres, with the men handling 
politics, feuds, food-raising, and major magical spells, and the women 
concerned with household maintenance, child rearing, the preservation of 
knowledge, and small bits of “Granny Magic.” What the men do not 
know is that there is always one woman, always named Responsible, who 
is the “meta-magician” of Ozark. She can do anything the male Magi- 
cians of Rank can do and more. She is the channel through which magical 
powers reach the magicians. The Grannys know all this, but they have 
been content for generations to let the men think they run things: the 
attitude is that male egos are too frail to handle too much truth. 

Here is how one Granny explains the difference between the sexes: 


“If,” she said, “a man does something properly, that’s an accident. That’s 
the first thing. As for the sorry messes they make in the ordinary way of 
things, that’s to be expected, and not to be held against them—they can’t 
help it. That’s the second thing. And the third thing—and this is to be 
well-remembered—is that no man must ever know the first two 
things... .” 

“And a woman?” one of the little girls had asked timidly. “How about 
a woman?” 

The Granny had gripped her cane till her knuckles gleamed like 


102 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


pearls. “There is nothing,” she said in a terrible voice like ice grinding 
together, “more despicable than a woman who cannot Cope!” (Jubilee 
259) 


Within this separate but unequal system, a woman can reach a state of 
considerable maturity and even power, so Elgin can write about Responsi- 
ble of Brightwater without relying on a male hero to set the story into 
motion or to act as a catalyst in her maturation. The quest that takes up 
the first book and sets the seal on her adulthood is her own idea. No man 
names her, either; that is a task for Grannys and one of the most 
important aspects of their magic. However, coming of age also includes 
coming to terms with sexuality, either outright or in symbolic guise. 

There is one man on Ozark who is a suitable match for Responsible: 
Lewis Motley Wommack the 33rd is handsome, charismatic, and as 
unorthodox as she. They meet and are attracted to one another, but her 
independence irks him. There is no room in the worldview he has been 
taught for such a strong woman. They seduce one another, with different 
motivations, and along with sexual conjunction comes close psychic 
communion. For her, the experience is pleasurable: 


Sure enough, it had been a kind of peace, a kind of wondrous rest, being 
with someone whose mind she could share as easily as she shared ordi- 
nary speech with everybody else. Like moving around in a place of 
columns and soft wind and— She brought herself up short. If there’d been 
words for what it was like, it wouldn’t have been what it was. . . . (Jubilee, 
367) 


Wommiack, however, does not like this invasion of his mind. Too proud 
simply to ask Responsible to get out, he calls in the Magicians of Rank to 
end it. They put Responsible into a magical sleep (Prince Charming in 
reverse), with disastrous results. Responsible is able to handle anything 
having to do with magic, but there is no satisfactory solution to love in a 
culture that treats men and women as separate species. Lewis Motley 
Wommack places Responsible and the planet into great peril that cannot 
be averted by any effort of the male Magicians. Instead, the problem is 
solved by two other young women, Responsible’s sister Troublesome and 
the saintly Silverweb of McDaniels. 

What Elgin has done is reverse the traditional distinction between 
men, who undergo ordeals and become fully adult, and women, who do 
not. Responsible, Troublesome, Silverweb, and the other young women we 
meet go through ordeals, both ritual and real, and are ready to meet the 
obligations of adulthood. The men, though, are too well protected by the 
Grannys and other women. They live their lives in a pleasant illusion of 


Women’s Coming of Age in Fantasy 103 


mastery. Unlike most earlier writers of fantasy, Elgin does not treat the 
society of women as something to be escaped or outgrown. Although 
Responsible has negative role models in her mother and in the one 
renegade Granny, Granny Leeward, she is generally well supported and 
instructed by the women she meets. Granny Leeward, and not Lewis 
Motley Wommack or the Magicians of Rank, is her chief adversary 
because she is a woman: she knows the true state of things and still 
chooses mischief, whereas the men are simply blundering as usual. Elgin 
treats men, not women, as a semi-alien race. Like the mules (an intelligent 
native species outwardly resembling our mules and condescending to be 
used as beasts of burden), men are capricious and balky. Both can be 
managed, but not really communicated with. The mules are generally 
considered to have more sense. 

No earlier fantasy that 1 know of is told so squarely from a woman’s 
perspective. The world of Ozark incorporates the rituals, institutions, and 
insights that early anthropologists thought women lacked. Having shown 
that women do indeed come of age, Elgin next points out the necessity of 
adapting society to accommodate the resulting adult woman. Responsible 
of Brightwater deserves the company of a man who will not confuse 
communion with invasion or courtesy with capitulation. 

It is possible to go beyond Elgin’s formulation of the female coming-of- 
age story, but only by positing a vastly different world from even ou’ 
comparatively feminized one. This is a step that fantasy has been reluctan 
to take, but science fiction provides many examples of all-women, an 
drogynous, or nonsexist societies and the development of young heroines 
within them. Science fiction readily proposes changes in economic sys- 
tems, family structures, political relationships, even language (such as 
David Gerrold’s unnerving use of single pronoun she for characters of 
either sex in his 1977 novel Moonstar Odyssey). Fantasy’s reliance on 
traditional motifs makes it less adaptable to such wholesale transforma- 
tions of society; it usually focuses on the development of the exceptional 
individual rather than the reformation of culture. It is probably not 
accidental that Elgin’s Ozark trilogy, unlike the other stories discussed in 
this chapter, is really science fantasy, combining the magic of fantasy with 
the future setting and technological underpinnings of science fiction. 
Science fantasy can do many things that traditional fantasy cannot; some 
of those will be taken up in the next chapter. 

But even without remaking every cultural institution, fantasy can call 
certain assumptions into question. It can begin with inherited story 
structures and direct them toward unexpected ends, turning Cinderellas 
into Princesses Charming and waking sleeping strengths in Sleeping Beau- 
ties. Its very avoidance of the details of contemporary society gives it 


104 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


flexibility, for its heroines need not carry such cultural burdens as women’s 
economic dependency, religious rationales for the suppression of women, 
and the commercial exploitation of women as sex objects. Freed of these, 
heroines have a chance of coping with personal relationships and with 
their own limitations. 

Individually composed narratives like these are not an exact analog of 
culturally sanctioned rites of passage, but they serve to remind us of the 
ritual process and its value to the individual. Though Jacking the au- 
thority of ritual, narratives are in some ways better suited to the needs of 
an evolving society. Because a reader undergoes only a vicarious induction 
into a new identity, that identity remains provisional and subject to 
further testing and growth. As such narratives proliferate, they serve to 
complement and comment upon one another. 

When we follow Mopsa’s path from toy-like creature to queen, we see 
how the extraordinary individual may defy societal expectations to achieve 
self-determination. When we follow Responsible as she comes to terms 
with her own power and authority, we see how the hidden operations of a 
culture may oppose its own official institutions to offer support to the 
emerging self. Each of the narratives considered here describes a different 
route to maturity and defines it in different terms: physical, emotional, 
metaphysical, political. Some of the heroes do, like their fairy tale prede- 
cessors, mark their passage by marriage, but in no case does marriage 
constitute or justify their achievements. 

None of them fail in their quests for expanded knowledge and scope of 
action. Because the conventions of fantasy require that a task undertaken 
be completed within the narrative, the outcome may, especially in formula 
fantasy, seem forced or inadequate to the problems posed. Ir will not, 
however, be the madness, suicide, or despair that seem the lot of the 
realistic heroine. In the works considered here, there is no forcing: 
maturity is hard-won but worth the winning, and the female heroes 
represent an unprecedented range of models for development. Their suc- 
cess in emerging as women of power and self-knowledge makes them 
more universal, as well: the male reader (like myself) can adopt Carolyn 
Heilbrun’s strategy and, by identifying with Tenar or Raederle or Respon- 
sible, learn more truly what it means to come of age. 


SEVEN 


Science Fantasy 


FOR SEVERAL YEARS, fantasy has shared shelf space in bookstores with 
science fiction: retailers assume that the two forms attract the same o 
overlapping audiences. More recently, many of the books on those shelve 
fit both categories at once. Booksellers and publishers, who like sucl 
books because they appeal to a broader segment of the fantasy/science 
fiction market than do either pure fantasy or hard-core science fiction, 
generally label the hybrid science fantasy. Writers, who tend to resist 
labels, nonetheless like the possibilities science fantasy offers. Just as both 
science fiction and fantasy may range from blatant imitations of imitations 
to wild innovation, science fantasy, though it has already developed some 
of the deadlier formulas, has also generated some of the most interesting 
stylistic, narratological, and epistemological experimentation in contem- 
porary fiction. 

Fantasy and science fiction run in parallel for much of their develop- 
ment. Many of the same writers contributed to both: Edgar Allan Poe, 
Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Mark Twain wrote sketches that contributed 
to the early development of science fiction, but all three worked with 
nonscientific fantasy as well. H. G. Wells is the author of “The Man Who 
Could Work Miracles” as well as The Time Machine. Among contempo- 
rary writers, Ursula K. Le Guin, Andre Norton, Gene Wolfe, Patricia 
McKillip, Samuel Delany, and John Crowley are representative of the 
successful switch-hitters. 


10S 


106 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


With so much shared history, it is not surprising that science fiction 
and fantasy overlap so frequently. Science fantasy is the area of that 
overlap. As a hybrid form, it can with equal justice be defined either as a 
form of fantasy that borrows from science fiction or as a subgenre of 
science fiction drawing inspiration from fantasy. Moreover, as a hybrid, it 
can be reinvented again and again as both science fiction and fantasy 
develop. It is always more clearly related to the current forms of its parent 
genres than to prior science fantasies. Each time the cross is made, the 
result is a fictional form able to make use of the conventions of science 
fiction and those of genre fantasy to comment on one another and on the 
worldview implied by each form of storytelling. 

Because there are already many histories and a few good theoretical! 
works dealing with science fiction, I need give only a brief summary here 
of its nature and development. Science fiction shares with fantasy a long 
prehistory of traditional story forms: Odysseus’s voyage and Icarus’s flight 
are precursors of both modern genres, as are tales of golems and other 
artificial beings, changeling legends, utopias, dream visions, and allego- 
ries. Science fiction began to separate from fantasy when science began to 
deliver on the promises made by alchemists and magicians. Mary Shelley’s 
Frankenstein (1818), often cited as the first science fiction novel, drew 
upon Gothic atmosphere and Greek myth, but Shelley substituted elec- 
tricity for divine fire, the laboratory for the haunted monastery, and the 
scientist for demon or demigod. Thus a new genre was constructed from 
pieces of the old. 

Science fiction, like fantasy, is easier to recognize than to describe 
formally. Viewed as a fuzzy set, it clusters around representative texts like 
H. G. Wells's The Time Machine (1895), E. E. “Doc” Smith’s Skylark 
series (1928-66), Robert E. Heinlein’s Citizen of the Galaxy (1957), 
Arthur C. Clarke’s Rendezvous with Rama (1973), Anne McCaffrey’s 
Dragonflight (1968), and Ursula K. Le Guin’s The Left Hand of Darkness 
(1969). More precisely, each of those titles represents a set within the 
larger set of science fiction. Texts resembling those I have named could be 
called, respectively, classic or sociological SF, space opera, Golden Age SF, 
hard-core or technological SF, science fantasy, and New Wave or literary 
SE 

Critics trying to make unity out of this multiplexity have proposed a 
number of useful terms, such as “extrapolation” and Darko Suvin’s “cog- 
nitive estrangement” (4), but no such term covers all the examples. Wells is 
clearly extrapolative: he looks for trends in the society of his day and 
extends the pattern into a hypothetical future. McCaffrey’s Dragon books 
are just as clearly not extrapolative: nothing in our world would lead us to 
anticipate the planet of Pern, with its devouring Thread and soaring 


Science Fantasy 107 


dragons. Likewise, Le Guin effectively “estranges” us from conventional 
gender roles: we turn from her world of Winter to the world surrounding 
us and both look strange, unlikely, awkward, and fascinating. Yet 
Heinlein does nothing of the sort: instead, he makes the universe into an 
extension of our own neighborhood. 

If there is any common thread among science fiction texts, it is their 
use of a particular language or discourse. The “science” part of the term 
often seems inappropriate, since neither the methods nor the accumulated 
knowledge of scientists is accurately portrayed in many texts that are 
nevertheless solidly within the genre. However, if scientific knowledge may 
be flouted, scientific terminology reigns supreme, even in the most non- 
cognitive space opera. “Magic” is not part of the language of SF; “telep- 
athy” is. “Faster-than-light travel” may be an impossibility, according to 
our understanding of physics, but the term itself has a scientific ring that 
justifies its use in science fiction. 

The vocabulary of science is only part of the discourse of science 
fiction. Other parts of the discourse include a set of recurring images that 
Gary K. Wolfe calls “icons” (Known 16): the robot, the monster, the 
barrier, the city; all conveying in concrete form science’s way of relating 
the human self to the unknown universe. Likewise, the conventional 
settings of SF, from the rocket ship to the galactic empire, refer directly to 
present or past states of scientific knowledge about the universe. And its 
recurring situations—First Contact, Time-Travel Paradox, Conceptua’ 
Breakthrough—invoke scientific paradigms and shifts in paradigms. On 
function of this discourse is to make both science and previous scienci 
fiction serve as background information for the SF reader. Or rather, since 
it is more important than mere background and often more interesting 
than the supposed foreground of character and plot, science serves as a 
megatext for each SF text. Science surrounds, supports, and judges SF in 
much the same way the Bible grounds Christian devotional poetry. It does 
not matter much if specific scientific references within the story are bogus, 
so long as the discourse is able to call upon the megatext. 

Evoking science in this fashion can serve several functions. For readers 
who consider themselves among its initiates, including most early fans, 
the scientific references can suggest a Galilean devotion to truth in the face 
of ignorance and orthodoxy, as in Isaac Asimov’s “Nightfall” (1941). For 
the public at large, which recognizes airplanes, automobiles, vaccines, and 
computers as products of science, the science megatext promises un- 
limited movement, adventure, and control of one’s environment. For 
writers, it greatly multiplies one’s options in generating plots, characters, 
and settings. It encourages speculation about social systems and individ- 
ual identities through extrapolation or analogy or a combination of the 


108 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


two. The discourse of science fiction may even call science itself into 
question, either its applications, as in Frankenstein, or its claims to 
objective validity, as in Stanislav Lem’s Solaris (1961). 

Yet SF is also limited by its reliance on the megatext of science. It 
becomes less and less possible to write about certain things and still call 
upon that megatext. Interstellar travel, contact with aliens, colonization of 
other planets; science has begun to cast doubt on whether any number of 
technological breakthroughs would make these fictional standbys facts. 
They may join Martian canals and lost civilizations as no-longer-effective 
springboards for the imagination, at least within the discourse of SF. 

Not only has SF lost some of its power, it has also lost its innocence in 
a world in which the products of science include horrifying war machines 
and seas of waste. SF has always had both optimistic and pessimistic 
strains, both A Modern Utopia and The Time Machine, but the difference 
has been largely a matter of one’s view of human nature, not of the 
capability and fitness of science itself. Now, however, some writers seem to 
have lost faith in the scientific imagination, looking outside the scientific 
megatext for other ways of seeing and judging. Yet there are very few 
alternative megatexts sufficiently powerful, comprehensive, and familiar 
to act as a commentary on science. Even religion lacks the authority it 
once had for many readers, because it cannot match the material payoffs 
provided by science. 

The discourse of fantasy can challenge SF, partly because it pays its 
own tribute to science. Impossibility itself, one of the elements of fantasy, 

s defined largely through reference to the current scientific worldview, 
ipecially where that coincides with common sense. Because it is the 

trrent view of reality that is violated in a fantasy, inventions that were 
mce fantastic may be no longer, or vice versa. The transmutation of 
metals might serve as an example of both sorts of change: once part of 
science, then impossible, and now achieved. Nonetheless, we can tell 
whether the transmutation is to be viewed as possible or not by the 
discourse that surrounds it. If an alchemist’s description of the phi- 
losopher’s stone were inserted verbatim into a modern fantasy, it would 
cease to testify to the existence of such a miraculous substance and 
become part of the rhetoric of the unreal. The same description within a 
science fiction text might be used to represent exploded myth or to 
highlight the mysterious properties of transuranic metals. 

If fantasy were only the denial of science, however, there would be no 
contest between them. But in affirming impossibility, fantasy opens the 
door to mythology, which is the name we give to cast-off megatexts. Gods, 
fairies, ancestor spirits, charms, spells: a whole host of motifs no longer 
convey belief and yet retain their narrative momentum and—and here is 





Science Fantasy 109 


one ; : 
of the great differences between science fiction and fantasy—their 


ies with the ways we wish we saw the world. They are emo- 
y and psychologically, if not scientifically, valid, and therefore most 
potent where science fiction is traditionally weakest. 

Most science fiction texts are essentially extroverted: concerned with 
behavior, physical environment, and the mechanisms of society. The 
discourse itself calls attention to the effect of scientific ideas on present 
and future actions. The characteristic narrative mode of SF, accordingly, is 
naturalistic, emphasizing external action, plausibility, and orderly chains 
of cause and effect. When SF does take up psychological themes, it is 
usually in relation to their physiological causes or sociological implica- 
tions. Very little SF is predicated on the science of psychology itself, which 
may suggest that psychology is more discourse than science. 

If science fiction’s gaze is outward and ahead, fantasy’s is inward and 
into the past. The discourse of fantasy encourages borrowings from folk 
literatures, most frequently from European fairy tales, Celtic legendry, 
Norse epic, and various bodies of myth. Because these traditional nar- 
ratives have shed whatever external referentiality they once had for their 
listeners, their internal dynamics become all the more important as ex- 
pressions of psychological processes. One way of connecting fantasy with 
experience is to see the fantasy world as a map of the mind, and the 
conflict taking place there as something like a medieval psychomachia, a 
contest between personified virtues and vices, or in more modern terms 
between integrative and destructive forces within the personality. 

When we contrast fantasy and science fiction, the rhetoric of eacl 
becomes more evident. For example, the emphasis on material causes ir 
SF finds its counterpart within fantasy in the assumption of immaterial 
connections. In a fantasy, invisible chains link a ring and a dark fortress, 
or a star-shaped birthmark and the stars inlaid on a harp. These intangi- 
ble connections reflect emotional or metaphoric associations, rather than 
demonstrable causative ties. Fantasy refers to them as magic; in a vision- 
ary poem they might be called correspondences. The pure strain of fantasy 
has less in common with naturalistic narrative, of which science fiction is 
a subspecies, than with the work of Blake or Rimbaud or Roethke. The 
naturalistic impulse is to undo these metaphoric connections, to see not 
resemblances but accidental associations, not correspondences but paral- 
lel results of forces like gravity or greed, history or hunger. 

Science fiction owes much of its power to the reader’s sense of being 
able to arrive at the fictional world by following current trends to their 
natural conclusion. Indeed, science fiction is so much a mirror of the 
writer’s own time and place that SF stories from the turn of the century or 
sed by historians as documents of vanished world- 


the 1950s could be u 





110 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


views, of futures past. Fantasy, on the other hand, posits a barrier between 
the fictional universe and the reader’s own. Because the fantasy world and 
the axioms that underlie it are radically unlike our own, the reader is 
forced to seek connections in other than rational, external directions, 
relating the portrayed reality instead to myth, dream, and other manifesta- 
tions of psychological or metaphysical principles. Fantasies too are prod- 
ucts of particular places and times, but what they document is the way a 
culture conceives the formation of a self from assembled experiences, 
instincts, and internalized cultural constructs. 

These differences in discourse might make it seem difficult to blend SF 
and fantasy, and indeed a common critical judgment says that they should 
not be mixed. Ursula K. Le Guin is reflecting this judgment when she 
criticizes her own early novel, Rocannon’s World (1966): 


There is a lot of promiscuous mixing going on in Rocannon’s World. We 
have NAFAL and FIL spaceships, we also have Brisingamen’s necklace, 
windsteeds, and some imbecilic angels. We have an extremely useful 
garment called an impermasuit, resistant to “foreign elements, extreme 
temperatures, radioactivity, shocks, and blows of moderate velocity and 
weight such as swordstrokes or bullets,” and inside which the wearer 
would die of suffocation within five minutes. The impermasuit is a good 
example of where fantasy and science fiction don’t shade gracefully into 
one another. A symbol from collective fantasy— the Cloak of Protection 
(invisibility, etc.)}—is decked out with some pseudoscientific verbiage and 
a bit of vivid description, and passed off as a marvel of Future Technology. 
This can be done triumphantly if the symbol goes deep enough (Wells's 
Time Machine), but if it’s merely decorative or convenient, it’s cheating. It 
degrades both symbol and science. . . . (134-35) 


It is true that many writers of science fantasy seem perfectly willing to 
cheat. A typical novel by Jack Chalker or Piers Anthony is rife with 
shortcuts and easy answers. The science is bogus; the fantasy insincere. 
Darko Suvin, whose discussions of science fiction emphasize its cognitive 
dimension, sees any intrusion of fantasy as a weakening of that function: 
he calls science fantasy a “misshapen subgenre” (68), and his judgment is 
borne out by its worst examples. But superimposing the discourse of 
science fiction on that of fantasy need not merely compound the potential! 
flaws in both genres. In the hands of a Roger Zelazny or a Gene Wolfe, the 
mixed mode may combine the intellectual rigor of fine science fiction with 
the profundity of the best symbolic fantasy, and it may take on qualities 
unique to itself as well. 

The success of science fantasy depends on the writer’s ability to handle 
two kinds of structure independently yet simultaneously. When this hap- 


Science Fantasy 111 


pens, and the two forms of discourse are given approximately equal 
weight, a third level of meaning develops as the voices of science fiction 
and fantasy are perceived by the reader to interact with and comment 
upon one another. 

The task is made a little easier by the fact that many of the charac- 
teristic motifs of fantasy reappear in science fiction in other guises. Immor- 
tality may be represented as being achieved through pharmacology; 
prophecy may be termed precognition; spells of illusion may be explained 
as the amplification and projection of brain waves. Each of these motifs 
has both an inner significance and an outer, which can be exploited 
respectively by fantasy and science fiction. Science fiction is able to make 
us perceive a fantastic idea as something reasonable and even likely, given 
enough time to work out the mechanics, while fantasy can take some- 
thing that already exists and make it seem miraculous. In both cases, the 
Operation is a matter of rhetoric: the way an idea is introduced, the 
vocabulary used to describe it, the manner in which it is made into an 
element of the story. 

In many science fantasies, each of the two forms of discourse attempts 
to account for the other. Sometimes one side is more convincing. If the 
favored pattern is science fictional, the result is not so much science 
fantasy as rationalized fantasy: the apparent magic is effectively explained 
away by the end of the story, the curtain drawn back to reveal the 
technological apparatus responsible for each miracle, as in Robert 
Heinlein’s Glory Road (1964). Or the rhetoric of fantasy may prove the 
stronger, in which case the science-fictional discourse may turn into a 
one-sided frame that introduces the actual story but does not close it off at 
the end. This is the case with C. S. Lewis’s Out of the Silent Planet (1938), 
which begins with a spaceship and ends with angels. Rarely are the two 
rhetorical modes in absolute balance, though the tensions that give sci- 
ence fantasy its hybrid vigor are most evident in the works that allow no 
easy dismissal of either viewpoint. 

Among works that mingle the rhetoric of science fiction with that of 
fantasy, nearly all can be classed as either humorous or mythological. A 
number, such as L. Sprague de Camp and Fletcher Pratt’s Incomplete 
Enchanter novellas, are both. Why should science fantasies tend toward 
these seemingly unrelated perspectives? One answer is that both humor 
and myth are products of the linguistic and perceptual disjunction that 
characterizes science fantasy. 

The humorous possibilities of the form were not recognized imme- 
diately. Edgar Rice Burroughs was one of the first to fuse fantasy and 
science fiction, beginning with his A Princess of Mars, serialized as 
“Under the Moons of Mars” in 1912. The formula developed in this book 


112 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


and reproduced in endless sequels involved transporting human heroes to 
exotic settings ostensibly based on astronomical observation but more 
closely akin to the lost-world fantasies of H. Rider Haggard. By using the 
terminology of science fiction for the apparatus of fantasy, Burroughs 
freed himself from most of the obligations of both forms. Where fantasy 
would restrict him to ethical consistency or narrative closure, he turns to 
the open-endedness of science fiction. Where science fiction would restrict 
him to the laws of biology or physics, he claims immunity under the 
dispensation of fantasy. 

The humor implicit in science fantasy is already there in Burroughs’s 
work, though he himself was generally unaware of it. His disregard of fact 
led him to commit scenes of hilarity no less enjoyable for being uninten- 
tional. In an introduction to one of her own works of science fantasy, 
Marion Zimmer Bradley describes her reaction to his blithely proposing a 
love interest between an earth man and an egg-laying Martian (in a scene 
actually from the first volume, A Princess of Mars): 


I was trained as a biologist—which probably protected me when people 
thought the old pulp magazine covers were immoral, with a bug-eyed 
monster carrying off a lightly draped maiden; I knew, if nobody else did, 
that the Bug-eyed Monster could not possibly have Evil Designs upon the 
Maiden—except, perhaps, to treat her as dinner, not as a Sex Object. I had 
giggled uncontrollably, reading the second of the John Carter of Mars 
books, in which John Carter and his beloved Martian Princess (what the 
heck was her name? Thuvia?) were standing hand in hand, sentimentally 
regarding their unhatched egg. (viii) 


It remained only for writers following Burroughs to exploit systemati- 
cally the incongruities he introduced unknowingly. The writers who did 
so emerged from the pulp magazine tradition for which Burroughs is in 
large part responsible. When Burroughs began writing, no specialized 
science fiction or fantasy magazine existed: the first Mars story appeared 
in a general adventure-story pulp called All-Story. By 1926, however, 
Hugo Gernsback had started his pioneering Amazing Stories, in which 
the later Mars books appeared. The genealogy of the pulps is complex, 
but, to trace one line of descent, Amazing Stories in 1930 discovered a 
young writer named John Campbell. Campbell went on to edit Astound- 
ing Science-Fiction, which under his direction became the most pres- 
tigious outlet for serious extrapolative fiction. Perhaps for relief from such 
sobriety, Campbell founded a companion fantasy magazine, Unknown, in 
1939, and it is that magazine’s brief run that created a vogue for humor- 
ous science fantasy. 

One of the most engaging of the Unknown writers was Fredric Brown. 


Science Fantasy Es 


In his introduction to Angels and Spaceships (1954), a collection of 
stories originally published in the two Campbell magazines, he discusses 
the two directions taken by his fiction, which correspond to the markets 
for which he wrote: 


Fantasy deals with things that are not and that cannot be. 
Science fiction deals with things that can be, that someday may be. 
Science fiction confines itself to possibilities within the realm of logic. (1) 


Science fiction, he goes on to say, requires explanation or at least the 
impression of it, while in fantasy the vampire, demon, or angel is accepted 
without question. 

When Brown describes the stories in his collection, he says that “the 
stories in this book divide about equally between fantasy and science 
fiction. By which I mean that some are clearly one, some clearly the other, 
and a few fall in between” (3). 

Many of Brown’s stories are funny, but these in-betweens, or science 
fantasies, are a cut above his usual mild satire. Brown had a generous 
stock of comic devices—puns, hallucinations, inebriated ad writers—that 
he threw freely into all kinds of stories. The science fantasies, though, 
exploit a distinctive line of humor, one that grows out of their hybrid 
nature. In these stories science fiction meets fantasy: a linotype machine 
achieves enlightenment, an “automatonic autosuggestive subvibratory su- 
peraccelerator” calls up a shy genie, and heaven proves to be a supe 
printshop. In each case, the humor depends on a sudden reversal of ou. 
expectations. If the story has been developing rationally, extrapolating 
from some reasonable assumption, the twist will be magical. If we think 
we are in a fairy tale, a bit of commonsense ingenuity will short-circuit the 
pattern. 

For example, Brown describes a surprising transformation witnessed 
by the hero of one story, “The Angelic Angleworm,” as he prepares for a 
fishing trip: 


His fingertips came together, but there wasn’t a worm between them, 
because something had happened to the worm. When he’d reached out for 
it, it had been a quite ordinary-looking angleworm. It most definitely had 
not had a pair of wings. Nor a— 

It was quite impossible, of course, and he was dreaming or seeing 
things, but there it was. 

Fluttering upward in a graceful slow spiral that seemed utterly 
effortless. Flying past Charlie’s face with wings that were shimmery-white, 
and not at all like butterfly wings or bird wings but like— 

Up and up it circled, now above Charlie’s head, now level with the roof 


114 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


of the house, then a mere white—somehow a shining white—speck 


against the gray sky. And after it was out of sight, Charlie’s eyes still looked 
upward. (115—16) 


This luminous, silly image is typical of the comic side of science 
fantasy. Its effect depends on two sets of associations. First, the worm is 
linked with scientific and commonsense reality: worms provide our first 
lesson in predation as we watch robins yanking them from wet lawns; 
their corpses are our first dissections in biology class; and they remind us 
that human beings too are part of the food chain. Second, this worm’s 
wings and the halo that Charlie can’t quite bring himself to name repre- 
sent escape from the natural order. The sudden swoop from nature to the 
supernatural, from burrowing in the earth to flying toward heaven, from 
death and corruption to shining immortality, is funny. A mythic treatment 
of the same image can be found in George MacDonald’s Lilith (1895). 


The scene precisely fits Arthur Koestler’s analysis of the intellectual 
structure of humor: 


It is the sudden clash between . . . two mutually exclusive codes of rules— 
or associative contexts—that produces the comic effect. It compels the 
listener to perceive the situation in two self-consistent but incompatible 
frames of reference at the same time; his mind has to operate simulta- 
neously on two different wavelengths. (“Humor and Wit,” 1974) 


Koestler calls this process “bisociation.” Humor results from the 
sudden dissolving of a seemingly stable pattern and its resolution into 
another pattern based on entirely different assumptions. In this case, the 
assumptions of science dissolve into those of fantasy, but not without 
strain; the strain is relieved by humor. 

In a pun, words with similar sounds provide the bisociative hinge, 
winging us suddenly into another plane of reference. It is probably not 
ccidental that most comic science fantasies are rife with puns. Pers 

Anthony’s Xanth novels, for example, are built on little else. In Brown’s 
story “The Angelic Angleworm,” it is an image, a sort of visual pun 
reinforced by the verbal play on angle/angel, that forces us to bisociate. In 
more fully developed science fantasies, characters and plot elements can 
add to the confusion by functioning simultaneously within the con- 
ventions of science fiction and those of fantasy. 

The humorous effect of blending the two forms of discourse was 
exploited in this more complex fashion by de Camp and Pratt in their 
series of tales about Harold Shea, the Incomplete Enchanter. The first of 


Science Fantasy 115 


these novellas, “The Roaring Trumpet,” appeared in Unknown in 1941 
and helped set that magazine’s characteristic tone of tongue-in-cheek 
wonderment. In de Camp and Pratt’s story, Harold Shea, a psychologist 
from Ohio, sets out to test a theory that our perceptions are dependent on 
Our assumptions about reality: change the assumptions and you change 
the perceptions; change the perceptions and you shift universes. Shea’s 
mathematical formulas propel him into the world of Norse mythology 
just before Ragnarok, the final battle between gods and giants. 

In this milieu, Shea acts as the comic stooge because he insists on 
applying technology where only magic works. He suffers successive hu- 
miliations when he attempts to use a flashlight, matches, a gun, and that 
textbook of basic science, the Boy Scout Manual. When he is not making 
a fool of himself clicking a nonfunctional firearm at a dragon, he is with 
equal thick-headedness failing to reckon with or even recognize the 
supernatural forces in operation around him. 

When Shea at last redeems himself, it is by combining psychology and 
magic. Finally realizing that the magic in this universe has its own logical 
consistency, he is able to cast a spell to free himself and his companion 
Heimdall, performing a little plastic surgery by sympathetic magic on 
their troll jailer. Having made a small contribution to the cause of the 
gods, he is accidentally ejected from the Norse universe just before the 
serious apocalyptic action gets going. De Camp and Pratt seem to have 
decided their narrative vehicle was too flimsy to include real mythological 
action, and so they used some variant of that eleventh-hour escape in all 
the subsequent Harold Shea novellas. 

What makes the story so funny? Juxtapositions of all kinds, from 
Shea’s anachronistic diction to his confrontation with gods he doesn’t 
really believe in. Shea is a humorous character not because he is a 
bumbling fool but because the conventional wisdom of science betrays 
him. After he catches on to the workings of magic and learns to adapt his 
worldview to circumstances, he ceases to be the butt of the joke, and in 
the sequels other greenhorns must be thrown in to take his place as the 
representative of misapplied learning: Reed Chalmers in “The Mathe- 
matics of Magic” (1940), Vaclav Polacek in “The Castle of Iron” (1941), 
Walter Bayard in “The Wall of Serpents” (1953), and Pete Brodsky in “The 
Green Magician” (195 4). 

There is also plot-based humor in the Harold Shea stories. The two 
basic patterns for humorous incidents are the unexpected escalation, or 
sorcerer’s apprentice motif, and the anticlimax, or dud firecracker. Every 
time Shea or one of his later substitutes attempts to perform a magical 
transformation, we can expect the results to be either too much or too 


116 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


little, ridiculously so in either case. Sometimes the result is at once too 
much and too little, as when Reed Chalmers attempts to produce a 
dragon and gets, first, a hundred placidly herbivorous specimens and, 
later, one properly fierce fire-breather the size of a chicken. 

The humor in both cases is based on violation of expectations ex- 
plicitly raised by the rhetorical structure. At first de Camp and Pratt were 
burlesquing a formula, so that the audience could be expected to know 
with a minimum of clues that a given sequence was supposed to end with 
an act of violence or a sudden inspiration on the part of the hero. By 
simply following the formula to the moment of crisis and having nothing 
at all happen, they could provoke an audience reaction, as Kant described 
the humorous response, “arising from the sudden transformation of a 
strained expectation into nothing” (The Critique of Judgment, trans. J. H. 
Bernard, quoted by Max Eastman, 153). When that humorous device 
itself became expected, as the burlesque of formula became established as 
another formula, it could be just as disconcerting, and therefore as funny, 
to have a smug expectation of nothing transformed into something. 

When we juxtapose magic and science, they may seem at first to be so 
unlike one another as to be incompatible, but the best part of de Camp 
and Pratt’s joke is that they are really quite similar, or can be made to 
seem so through carefully parallel rhetorical frameworks. Shea’s par- 
ticular brand of science, psychology, works quite well in the various magic 
worlds he visits, because its techniques—the use of arcane words, hypno- 
tic gestures, and elaborate metaphors to manipulate unseen forces—are 
also those of the enchanter. Likewise, abstract mathematical formulas, 
‘ike “If either P or Q is true or (Q or R) is true then either Q is true or (P 

x R) is false—”(The Compleat Enchanter 12), are, to the uninitiated, 
othing more than variations on “abracadabra” or “hocus-pocus,” and so 
Reed Chalmers can turn himself into a powerful sorcerer using symbolic 
logic. 

The formula developed by de Camp and Pratt has been taken up by 
many other writers. Among the stories that owe a debt to the Incomplete 
Enchanter series are Keith Laumer’s Lafayette O’Leary novels beginning 
with The Time Bender (1981), Gordon Dickson’s The Dragon and the 
George (1976), Christopher Stasheff’s The Warlock in Spite of Himself 
(x1969) and its sequels, and James Schmitz’s The Witches of Karres (1966). 

Suzette Haden Elgin’s Ozark trilogy draws on the formula but at the 
same time reinvigorates it through the application of a new science, 
linguistics. Ozark is a world that most of its inhabitants take for purely 
magical. Only Elgin’s heroine knows that the flying mules and other spells 
are—I was going to say explainable by science, but that is not it exactly. 
Rather, magic and science seem to be parallel systems of meaning, trans- 


Science Fantasy 117 


latable into one another and subject to the same metalinguistic rules. 
Elgin reinforces this view by modeling her magic spells after operations of 
transformational grammar, which are more than a little reminiscent of 
Harold Shea’s symbolic logic. 


“Let there be,” I said over the whole, “a name, sub-N; and let there be a 
filling of the null term, sub-T; and let there be no alteration of the 
underlying structure, sub-S!” (Tiwelve Fair Kingdoms 164) 


But Elgin does not merely use her linguistic science as hocus-pocus. 
Reflecting her own academic training, her transformations are scru- 
pulously worked out to indicate the linguistic underpinnings of the mag- 
ical operations of Insertion, Deletion, Movement, and Substitution. By 
proposing the simple but far-reaching assumption that grammatical struc- 
ture governs, rather than simply imitating, the thing described, Elgin 
reunites grammar with its cognates gramarye and glamour. On Planet 
Ozark, anyone with the knowledge and gift can perform arcane opera- 
tions on the deep structure of reality, so long as she remembers the 
fundamental constraint: “it is not allowed, ever, to change the Meaning 
of things” (165—66). A basic principle of transformational grammar thus 
echoes the injunctions of serious fantasy. 

In using linguistics as the scientific side of science fantasy, Elgin 
underlines the rhetorical basis of her story. The reader is alerted to the 
role of grammatical juxtapositions in determining points of view when 
such juxtapositions directly affect the course of the story. By turning the 
double perspective of science fantasy on the language in which she is 
telling the story, Elgin not only justifies the magic of names and word 
games that operates on Planet Ozark, but also reminds us of how belief in 
such magic originated in our own past. The humor arises from the fact 
that, thinking ourselves true believers in science, we retain our faith tn 
linguistic magic. 

All these stories work because both parent genres are ripe for a little 
mockery. Most science fiction stories and virtually all fantasies take 
themselves pretty seriously, and indeed both forms are capable of express- 
ing pretty serious matters. Science fiction has a lot to say about the 
universe outside ourselves; fantasy about the inner one. But with repeti- 
tion—repetition without thought—the impact of both genres wears off. 
By the fifth galactic empire, the ninth perilous quest, the dozenth parallel 
universe, all of those devices begin to seem rather shopworn. 

The fantasy side, for example, suffers from its dependence on a limited 
stock of traditional images: wizards, dragons, unicorns, and the like. If a 
writer needs a little danger, a test for a hero, or a lesson in greed, it is 
easy—too easy—to trot out a dragon. 


118 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


Then along comes science fantasy to rationalize dragons and thereby 
make them ridiculous. Looked at scientifically, dragons are too big to be 
graceful, too heavy to fly unless they are turned into blimp-like bags of 
gas, absurdly picky in their eating habits considering the available bio- 
mass of princesses. None of this invalidates the archetypal power of a well- 
imagined dragon: Smaug and Orm Embar remain awesome, soaring, 
crafty, ravenous marvels. But it may make it more difficult for a writer to 
use dragons without serious consideration of their significance to that 
writer. 

The more formulaic fantasy is also limited to traditional story lines: 
the coming of age, the quest, the marriage of fairy and mortal, the 
apocalyptic battle. The problem with these narrative structures is that we 
know how they come out. Delay as long as she may, the fantasist must at 
last come to the foreordained ending. But the science fantasist need not. 
The narrative can skip out before the end, as Harold Shea does repeatedly, 
or it can simply refuse to follow the expected path, as the Ozark trilogy 
deftly avoids the romantic resolution it seems to be leading to. After 
reading these stories, we find that the traditional fantasies seem less 
predictable, their endings more precarious and therefore more affecting. 

On the other side, one of the flaws of much science fiction is its overuse 
of the Robinson Crusoe hero—the man (it’s almost always a man) who 
can survive anything, solve any problem singlehanded. He need only 
approach the problem with the proper scientific attitude and construct 
the relevant mechanism. This was a particular disease of the genre at the 
time that de Camp and Pratt created Harold Shea. Shea’s self-image is in 
the scientific Robinson Crusoe mold, but the reality is quite different. He 
is least competent when most confident, and many of the problems he 
faces are simply beyond his abilities. When he does succeed, it is usually 
because of self-examination that reveals his own and consequently his 
enemies’ internal weaknesses. 

Science fantasy can derive humor from science, from magic, from the 
linguistic habits and beliefs that arise from those two perspectives, and 
from the storytelling formulas that make use of them. But the clash of 
rhetorics is not always funny. To quote Arthur Koestler again, “When two 
independent matrices of perception or reasoning interact with each other 
the result . . . is either a collision ending in laughter, or their fusion in a 
new intellectual synthesis, or their confrontation in an aesthetic experi- 
ence” (Act of Creation 45). If the Harold Shea or Ozark stories illustrate 
some of the best use of comic “collision,” science fantasies like Delany’s 
The Einstein Intersection (1967) or Zelazny’s Creatures of Light and 
Darkness (1969) are examples of creative “fusion,” in which ancient 


Science Fantasy 119 


myths are reinscribed in the language of scientific philosophy. Again, the 
effect of these stories is a product of their juxtaposition of two rhetorics, 
two ways of speaking about and, hence, of perceiving the fictional uni- 
verse. 

How did two rhetorical systems develop within one language in the 
first place? According to Owen Barfield, the split is older than what we 
think of as “science,” yet it was not always present in human speech. The 
further back we trace the history of any word, says Barfield, the more 
concrete the meaning of that word seems to be. Thus, the ancestor of 
spirit was not an abstract essence or soul but a puff of wind. However, 
according to Barfield, it is a mistake to suppose that at some point the 
Indo-European-speaking tribes decided to apply the concrete term meta- 
phorically to some principle of life within themselves. Instead, the older 
term meant something that was not exactly “wind” and not exactly “life” 
or “spirit” but a more inclusive category incorporating all of these. At 
some time in the past, there were no pure abstractions, as we can deter- 
mine by finding the goad in centrifugal or the twist in wrong. Likewise, 
there were no purely concrete words. The words for “flame” or “seed” 
included in their meaning both the perceptible objects and the perceiver’s 
subjective response. A more adequate translation might be something like 
“the flame I see dancing before me and the corresponding flame I perceive 
in myself.” 

Only later, as language and thought developed, did “these single 
meanings split up into contrasted pairs—the abstract and the concrete, 
particular and general, objective and subjective” (85). Until that time, says 
Barfield, natural symbol and spiritual significance were one and the same, 
and from that unity came myth: 


The naturalist is right when he connects the myth with the phenomena of 
nature, but wrong if he deduces it solely from these. The psycho-analyst is 
right when he connects the myth with “inner” (as we now call them) 
experiences, but wrong if he deduces it solely from these. Mythology is 
the ghost of concrete meaning. Connections between discrete phenomena, 
connections which are now apprehended as metaphor, were once per- 
ceived as immediate realities. (91-92) 


In Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World (1983), 
Verlyn Flieger points out that J. R. R. Tolkien was an admirer of Barfield’s 
work and aimed in his own writing at recapturing the undivided percep- 
tion from which myth emerged. He certainly brought together the phys- 
ical and the spiritual in such images as the binding Ring or Galadriel’s 
prophetic Mirror, but only by limiting his treatment of physical reality to 





120 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


a prescientific conception of the world. What the serious writer of science 
fantasy is attempting to do is not to recapture an older worldview but to 
forge a new one from elements that have long been developing in isolation. 

Gods began appearing in science fantasy as early as 1913, in the 
second installment of Burroughs’s Mars series, which is titled The Gods of 
Mars. Burroughs’s way of reconciling the mythic perspective with the 
scientific, however, is to discredit the former. The mythology of Mars, 
with its mysterious River Iss in the Valley Dor, where the worthy dead go 
to meet Issus, Goddess of Death, turns out to be a sham. Issus is a mad, 
withered crone who feeds on those she is supposed to rule. 

Once again, Burroughs established a formula on which later writers 
continued to rely. The skeptical hero unmasking fraudulent gods reap- 
pears in pulp fantasy and science fantasy throughout the 1930s, ’40s, and 
*50s. Yet in the hands of Abraham Merritt, C. L. Moore, Leigh Brackett, 
and Henry Kuttner, to name some of the most memorable utilizers of the 
formula, something was added to it. The gods remain vindictive and 
unworthy of the human worship they lay claim to, but they do begin to 
represent something real. The forces they represent cannot be reduced to 
trickery or scientific gadgetry; the gods can be defeated but at the loss of 
some intangible value, which may be equated with the inward dimension 
of which Barfield speaks. 

By the 1960s, a number of writers reconsidered the formulaic demand 
for the defeat of myth by science. Andre Norton, in particular, helped 
forge a new formula in which the protagonist accepts and incorporates 
within himself two kinds of truth, one scientific and the other magical. In 
such novels as Catseye (1961), The Beast Master (1959), and Judgment on 
Janus (1963), she creates a future history in which technology has led to 
disaster, with whole planets destroyed by warfare among civilizations 
with too much knowledge and too little wisdom. Within this context, 
however, a few individuals learn to reject the mechanistic vision. Ac- 
knowledging their kinship with the natural world, they gain the power to 
defeat threats like the animated empty spacesuit of Judgment. This power 
is usually represented as both outside and inside the hero: it is in one 
sense a ancient godlike being and in another sense a hitherto untapped 
human capacity. 

Many writers made use of Norton’s science fantasy formula, including 
Marion Zimmer Bradley, Anne McCaffrey, and Ursula K. Le Guin. De- 
spite Le Guin’s self-criticism, quoted earlier, her first four novels mingle 
the scientific and mythic perspectives with ever increasing conviction. In 
Rocannon’s World, Le Guin posits two cultures, one a space-going tech- 
nocracy and the other a feudal society with a belief in magic. In her 


Science Fantasy 121 


prologue, a woman from the feudal society visits the world of the scien- 
tists, and in the novel proper the anthropologist Rocannon returns the 
favor. Both times, events are perceived according to the biases of the 
onlooker, either as straightforward cause and effect or as the workings- 
out of legend. The mix is largely successful and would be more so if, as Le 
Guin says, she had kept her science more rigorously scientific and her 
magic less eclectic. By the novel’s end, Rocannon has come to view the 
natives’ outlook as no less valid than his own: what he has been calling 
telepathy and coincidence might with equal justice be called magic and 
fate. 

The contrast between high and low technologies, and the attempt to 
combine the truths accessible to each, reappears in Le Guin’s Planet of 
Exile (1966), City of Illusions (1967), and The Left Hand of Darkness 
(1969). In the last of these, the narrative form itself reflects the fusion, for 
it alternates eyewitness reports by the alien envoy, Genly Ai, with the 
legends, tales, and songs of Gethenian natives. The story would not be 
complete without both kinds of narratives. 

Roger Zelazny’s science fantasies constitute a series of variations on 
the theme of technological advancement so great that men and women 
can become the gods they have always imagined. In Lord of Light (1967) 
the Hindu pantheon has been recreated on a colony planet, and in 
Creatures of Light and Darkness a more loosely interpreted Egyptian 
pantheon rules the entire universe. This formula serves Zelazny very well, 
allowing him to suggest that at the end of the road of scientific discovery 
lie the same problems our ancestors dreamed of. He implies that it 1: 
easier to acquire godhood than enlightenment. 

A particularly ingenious way of juxtaposing the rational and emo- 
tional or scientific and magical perspectives is that utilized by Samuel 
Delany in The Einstein Intersection. In this novel, Delany finds the 
justification for looking beyond science within science itself. Citing the 
mathematician Goedel as a sort of patron saint of improbability, he 
constructs a world in which nothing is what it seems, and the old 
Einsteinian limits on perception and movement are bypassed. The charac- 
ters in his novel, who seem to be mutated humans, are not human at all; 
rather, they are, as the computer PHAEDRA says to one, “a bunch of 
psychic manifestations, multi-sexed and incorporeal . . . trying to put on 
the limiting mask of humanity” (148). The ways these beings find order in 
their irrational world is to reenact human myths, from Orpheus to Billy 
the Kid. 

Richard Cowper, in The Road to Corlay (1979) and two sequels, uses 
science fantasy to create a sort of post-Christian mythology with its roots 


122 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


in both faith and science. The quasi-medieval future depicted in Cowper’s 
story is the result of a disaster caused by humans, a flood triggered by 
abuse of the environment: 


The Drowning was the direct result of humanity’s corporate failure to see 
beyond the end of its own nose. By 1985 it was already quite obvious that 
the global climate had been modified to the point where the polar ice caps 
were affected. (55) 


Few, however, remember the scientific explanation of the flood. To 
most people it was the Third Coming, a scourge sent by God to prepare 
the way for a spiritual rebirth at the beginning of the third millennium 
A.D. Though the immediate cause was man’s technological overreaching, 
it also seems to represent divine intercession, fitting thus into a prophetic 
sequence: “The first coming was the man; the second was fire to burn 
him; the third was water to drown the fire, and the fourth is the Bird of 
Dawning” (38). After Christ comes Pentecost, then floods, and finally, at 
the time of the story, the White Bird. 

This bird, like the flood, is a key image connecting the scientific and 
supernatural viewpoints. There is no visible, tangible bird in the story. It 
first appears as a vision, perhaps a mass hallucination, on New Year’s Eve 
of the year 2999. The source of the vision is a tune played by a young 
piper, who is martyred immediately after. Thereafter, the White Bird is 
considered to manifest itself in various forms: in the pipes, in the tune the 
boy played, in the saint’s legend that forms, in certain followers of the new 
faith, and in their developing psychic powers. 

To the faithful, the bird is real and capable of miracles. However, 
Cowper is careful always to provide alternative explanations. The maker 
of the pipes, though he is called the Wizard of Bowness, may have 
performed his wizardry through rediscovered technology: “in Kendal the 
folk used to whisper that he’d stored up a treasurehouse of wisdom from 
the Old Times” (28). The pipes’ magic could be explained as sonic 
manipulation of emotions. Other seemingly magical phenomena might be 
the result of a mutation for extrasensory perception and psi powers. 

Reinforcing this view of events is a second plot concerning a man from 
our own time who, as a result of an experiment with “compound neu- 
rodrugs,” finds himself inhabiting the body of a man a thousand years in 
the future. His experiences are witnessed by his coworkers on a sort of 
super electro-encephalograph hooked up to his unconscious body. He 
and the research team monitoring him interpret events scientifically, while 
the characters in the future see them from a religious or magical perspec- 
tive. The former view assumes a rationally explainable, mechanistic uni- 


Science Fantasy 123 


verse, while the latter sees the world as a moral battleground in which 
immaterial forces may be embodied temporarily, as the White Bird is 
embodied in the piper and his tune. 

Does Cowper reconcile the two views? His plot is so engineered that 
its resolution depends on both. The twentieth-century research team 
sends a man into the future. There he meets and falls in love with a 
woman who thus becomes the foretold Bride of Time; their child will 
carry on the work of the White Bird. Each event is both natural and 
magical, both wave and particle, as it were. 

By overlapping the two kinds of narrative, Cowper is not so much 
attempting to reconcile scientific and religious worldviews as examining 
the nature of other kinds of nonmaterial entities—beliefs, ideas, percep- 
tions—and showing how they impinge on the physical world in ways not 
yet predictable by science. Hence the emphasis on images of the real but 
intangible: the rush of invisible wings, a story that changes lives, and a 
tune that can heal or kill and overload a circuit a thousand years before it 
is played. 

The past decade has produced many more varieties of science fantasy 
than can be examined here. Octavia Butler applies a scientific perspective 
to African myths in Wild Seed (1980). Her shape-shifting immortal 
Anyanwu passes to her children in both the old world and the new the 
ability to survive with integrity in the face of human oppression and 
supernatural threat. Because Anyanwu’s abilities are based on self-knowl- 
edge, down to the chemical processes within her own cells, they cannot be 
taken away or misused even by the amoral Doro, whose powers of 
invasion and possession are in some senses the male equivalent of her 
female, generative ones. Butler shows how the cultural heritage of African 
Americans can provide understanding of the present and direction for the 
future, for Anyanwu’s descendants will be the psychically gifted Patter- 
nists of Butler’s other novels. The old concepts of mother goddess, 
werewolf, and ogbanje, or spirit child, become ways of comprehending the 
meaning and potential uses of genetic manipulation and other infant or 
unborn technologies. 

In writing the four-volume Book of the New Sun (1980-83) and its 
sequel The Urth of the New Sun (1987), Gene Wolfe has demonstrated 
that science fantasy has as much potential for epic grandeur and symbolic 
complexity as either parent genre, which means as any form of fiction. 
Wolfe’s imagined world easily accepts the discourse of either form, for it 
projects a time when advanced technology represents not the future but 
the distant past, traces of which remain and mingle with the magic that 
may be only technology more advanced still. 

From vocabulary to overall narrative shape, Wolfe makes full use of 


—————-eeraaeare —EE = . OS 
. _ es 


124 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


science fantasy’s double vision. He introduces the new and strange by 
using words that are old and strange: archaic, half-familiar words like 
fuligin, lazaret, hierodule, and pelerine. Mostly Latinate, these terms 
simultaneously suggest the Latin vocabulary of science and the Latin of 
medieval church, court, and coven. Wolfe generally invents by reusing 
what is forgotten: a mix of history, legend, and literary sources generates a 
narrative of seemingly inexhaustible fertility. Far-future Urth features 
scenes of horror, eerie beauty, decadence, rural simplicity, and sheer 
otherness that one can ascribe no human quality to. 

But many of the most vivid inventions are the direct result of the 
science fiction-fantasy fusion. A creature of Arabic legend becomes the 
alzabo, a hyena-like creature that borrows the voices of its victims to 
tempt other prey. From the tissues of the alzabo, then, science has isolated 
a drug that enables humans to gain the memories of others—but only by 
imitating another legend and becoming ghouls. To take another example, 
a character named Jonas hides a secret: one of his arms is mechanical. But 
he is no ordinary science fiction cyborg. The mechanical arm and most of 
his body are original. A robot who has survived beyond the ability of his 
culture to repair him, he has been given an arm and head of flesh to 
replace damaged parts, and thereby turned into a tragic figure burdened 
by his partial humanity. 

Wolfe’s hero Severian must evolve into a savior of humankind, and his 

salvation involves the regeneration of earth’s, or Urth’s, sun. Every step of 
his task is mythic: his journey toward rulership; his two talismans, the 
executioner’s sword and the healing jewel; his testing as representative of 
and intercessor for mankind; and his destruction and renewal of the earth. 
ivery step also fits into the rhetorical pattern of science fiction, for each 
nvolves his learning another lost secret of the technological past and 
thereby gaining more control over his life. The New Sun itself loses none 
of its mystical, apocalyptic meaning for being fueled by a white hole. 
Within the narrative context, the leaking of energy into our universe 
through a white hole can be also a White Fountain, sign of the Increate’s 
victory over entropy. Neither way of referring to it exhausts the reality of 
the thing itself, but both together provide a way of establishing its rela- 
tionship to Severian and to ourselves. 

These mythic science fantasies examine the twofold implications of 
words and images. In the best of these works, archetypes are subjected to 
the same scrutiny that a writer of conventional science fiction will give to 
the paradoxes of time travel or the ecological implications of terraforming 
new worlds. The test of good science fantasy is that it generate patterns we 
can respond to as we do to well-made fantasy without losing the cognitive 
dimension of good science fiction. 


Science Fantasy 125 


The comic science fantasies are not so ambitious, but they too make us 
more aware of the assumptions underlying science fiction and fantasy. 
They are particularly good at revealing the weaknesses inherent in both 
forms, the shoddy places in the fabric that serious writers in either genre 
are careful to camouflage. 

Through humor, science fantasy reveals that the fantasist and the 
science fiction writer are often incomplete enchanters, the one out of 
touch with contemporary knowledge of the universe around us, the other 
unaware of the complex inner worlds of his characters. The first comic 
science fantasies don’t go much beyond pointing out the faults of either 
form, but their joking collisions opened the way for more serious fusions 
and confrontations of the symbolic and the scientific. Those early de 
Camp and Pratt-falls led the way to narratives like Gene Wolfe’s: mythic 
renderings of our scientific understanding and scientific examinations of 
our oldest beliefs. 


a 


EIGHT 


Recapturing the Modern 
World for the Imagination 


WITHIN A GENRE LIKE FANTASY, subgenres regularly emerge, merge, or 
disintegrate. One such subgenre is science fantasy; another is the women’s 
coming-of-age novel discussed in chapter 6. These subgenres, like the 
larger set of which they are a part, are fuzzy sets. They radiate from a few 
well-known and influential texts, as each new author construes the defin- 
ing principles of those texts and adapts the perceived type to her own 
ends. A text that was conceived by its author as a development within one 
type of fantasy may serve subsequent writers as a model for quite a 
different variety, if its deviations from type are reinterpreted as a new set of 
norms. If a subgenre attracts enough interest from readers and writers, it 
may eventually change the center of gravity of the whole genre, with its 
own exemplary texts replacing the originals as the defining instances of 
the set, until the former norms begin to seem like divergences. 

Of all the subgenres to emerge within fantasy in recent years, the one 
that promises to reshape the genre most significantly is as yet unnamed, 
or rather no name for it has proved adequate. Sometimes called “low 
fantasy” (Tymn 5), sometimes “real world fantasy” or “modern urban 
fantasy,” it is characterized by the avoidance of the enclosed fantasy 
worlds predominant in earlier fantasies, from Lewis Carroll’s Wonderland 
to Ursula K. Le Guin’s Earthsea. Instead, these fantasies describe settings 
that seem to be real, familiar, present-day places, except that they contain 
the magical characters and impossible events of fantasy. 


126 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 127 


Fantasies of this sort are not really unprecedented. The Victorian 
writer F. Anstey exploited the comic possibilities of the eruption of magic 
into middle-class London in books such as Vice Versa (1882), and his 
lead was followed by the great Edwardian children’s fantasist Edith 
Nesbit. Horror writers, likewise, have always made use of familiar set- 
tings: the gulfs of irrationality and violence that their stories open up 
derive their effectiveness from the apparent ordinariness and security that 
they breach. A third established use of the fantastic in realistic settings is 
to generate satirical parables, like Gogol’s “The Nose.” 

Most closely related to the new form is the mode of writing called 
magic realism. Neither exclusively comic nor horrific, nor even satirical, 
magic realism calls on all of these responses as part of a larger structure. 
The term was borrowed from art criticism, since these stories often resem- 
ble the meticulously surreal paintings of René Magritte or Giorgio De 
Chirico. The magic realists of Latin America deliberately violate the 
norms of a realism associated with colonial powers and capitalist systems 
(Young and Hollaman 3). By placing magical beliefs on a par with science 
and blending legend with history, writers like Gabriel Garcia Marquez, 
Julio Cortazar, Clarice Lispector, and Maria Luisa Bombal create fic- 
tional worlds at once solid and slippery. Fantastic beings move through 
real historical events; realistic characters undergo mysterious transforma- 
tions; the foreground is starkly real but the background is obscured and 
deepened by veils of mist. Many magic realist texts have been both critical 
and popular successes because they combine inventive fertility, folktale- 
like plots, and a resistance to interpretive closure: features characteristic 
of at least one form of literary postmodernism, as discussed in chapter 3. 

The Latin American form of magic realism has influenced many North 
American writers, not only among “literary” or “writing school” fic- 
tionalists but also within genres like science fiction and fantasy. Though 
One Hundred Years of Solitude (1968) might seem to have very little in 
common with The Lord of the Rings (besides length), the fantasy genre as 
it had evolved in the 1960s and ’7os was well prepared to integrate the 
influence of magic realism, since writers like Le Guin, Alan Garner, and 
Roger Zelazny had already begun to explore the capacity of the fantasy 
form to compound narrative complexity and confound expectations with- 
out violating generic rules. Thus, it is sometimes difficult to tell which 
contemporary fantasies are deliberate evocations of postmodernist uncer- 
tainty and which are accidental reinventions by ingenious exploiters of 
formula. I suspect some of the texts that I have most enjoyed are, one 
might say, knowingly naive, while others are naively wise. In either case, 
the traditions and constraints of the fantasy genre seem to work to prevent 
the kind of archness that dooms John Updike’s The Witches of Eastwick 


128 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


(1984) or the formlessness that overtakes Stephen Millhauser’s otherwise 
promising From the Realm of Morpheus (1986). 

The magic realist example has worked to reinforce fantasy’s move 
from other-worldly to “real world” settings. Replacing Poictesme or Nar- 
nia with Ann Arbor or Seattle is not a simple matter of changing the 
names and descriptions. Fantasies such as R. A. MacAvoy’s Tea with the 
Black Dragon (1983), Eleanor Arnason’s Daughter of the Bear King 
(1987), Orson Scott Card’s Seventh Son (1987), or Nancy Willard’s 
Things Invisible to See (1985) create and resolve contradictions in such a 
way as to challenge our notions about the ways literature can transform 
experience and about the limitations of fantasy as a genre. 

Realistic modes of fiction attempt to generate, as a primary response, 
recognition. If a novel like Huckleberry Finn succeeds, we feel we have 
been given an authentic glimpse into the human condition, at least as 
manifest in a particular time and place. Fantasy, though, as I argued 
earlier, is directed primarily toward a kind of response we call wonder. 
Wonder is connected with seeing things not so much as they are but as 
they might be or ought to be. The unknown can generate wonder; so can 
the familiar seen in a new light. (In identifying the primary response, I do 
not wish to suggest that realistic writing cannot generate its own form of 
wonder—consider Huck Finn’s experiences on the river—or that fantasy 
might not also hold up a mirror to human nature.) 

The ability of fantasy to generate wonder, as I suggested in chapter 1, is 
closely tied to both setting and story line. The setting is traditionally an 
enclosed Other World of magical beings and miraculous events: Narnia or 
Middle Earth. The story follows the fairy tale model: whatever happens 
along the way, the ending will come out right. We sometimes call this 
coming out right a happy ending, for short, but readers of the great 
fantasies know it is much more ambiguous and less trivial than that. 

The setting makes the ending possible. A magical world cannot be 
confused with real life, and so the story is entitled to reach the most 
satisfying, rather than the most probable, conclusion. Frodo will reach 
Mount Doom and destroy the Ring. The conclusion, in turn, validates our 
response to the imagined world, our astonished delight at ents and elves 
and mallorn trees. A different ending might have reinforced experiences in 
Saruman’s tower or Shelob’s lair; it might have generated irony or horror, 
but not wonder. 

But the recent fantasies mentioned above, and others by Megan 
Lindholm, Charles de Lint, Sheri S. Tepper, Diana Paxson, Emma Bull, 
Peter Beagle, and John Crowley, paradoxically attempt to reattach the 
wonder-generating mechanisms of fantasy to realistic-seeming settings 


and situations. 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 129 


At this point I must settle on a name for this subgenre of fantasy, so I 
don’t have to keep listing authors or titles. “Magic realism” has too many 
other applications; “low fantasy” implies a judgment with which I do not 
agree; “‘real world’ fantasy” requires either laying in a large stock of 
quotation marks or seeming to take for granted the nature of reality. One 
might borrow a name from the past, naming the form after one of its 
precursors: Nesbittian or Charles Williamsesque fantasy. But instead of 
any of these, 1 am going to suggest the name indigenous fantasy. That is 
to say, this is fantasy that is, like an indigenous species, adapted to and 
reflective of its native environment. 

The choice to write indigenous rather than Tolkienian fantasy involves 
making two simultaneous and incompatible assertions: first, that the 
story takes place in the ordinary world accessible to our senses, and, 
second, that this world contains—contrary to all sensory evidence and 
experience— magical beings, supernatural forces, and a balancing princi- 
ple that makes fairy tale endings not only possible but obligatory. 

Indigenous fantasy is thus an inherently problematic form. It is also, 
by the same token, inherently interesting, for one wonders what strategies 
the author will adopt to conceal or bridge the built-in conceptual gap. 
The gap itself reflects our different ways of knowing and responding tc 
the world, the magical and scientific dimensions of thought and languag: 
that are reflected in science fantasy. It also reflects the less evident gul. 
between story and history, our two ways of organizing time and placing 
ourselves within it. 

The most rigorously realistic fiction emulates history in all its muddle 
and sprawl. Its mode of discourse is essentially reportorial, for history 
ultimately derives from the eyewitness account. We make use of that 
discourse every day in conversation, telling what we saw, what we did, 
what someone said to us. We usually make an attempt to arrange our 
account in chronological order, with the logical sequence of cause and 
effect providing the connections between events: “Then he got noisy 
again, so | hit him with the lamp.” 

So long as one sticks to the rules—tell what happened or reasonably 
might have happened, describe what one saw or might have seen, keep 
events more or less in order and causes evident—one can incorporate any 
incident or emotion, adopt any perspective or style. This kind of reporting 
is so adaptable and seems so natural that we tend to forget that it is not 
the only form of discourse available, even in conversation. There are also, 
for instance, tall tales and jokes, neither of which is arranged according to 
the rules of historical discourse. Fantasy shares with these other oral 
genres a certain contrived or constructed quality. Its characters are chosen 
and its incidents arranged to fit a predetermined pattern, which allows for 


130 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


the achievement of a particular effect: laughter in the case of the joke, the 
refreshment of vision called wonder in the case of the fantasy. 

Defining serious literature only in terms of the discourse of reporting, 
as critics have done for the past century, ignores the human need to cast 
the events of one’s life in story form, rather than exclusively in reference to 
history. Stories have heroes, whereas histories only have actors. Stories 
have beginnings and ends, and an internal dynamic that moves them 
toward a particular goal. The form of a story is its chief meaning, whereas 
the meaning of history must be inferred through application to external 
values. 

Other World fantasy more or less bypasses history by inventing a 
setting in which every object, incident, or motivation may be assumed to 
be in service to a preordained and comprehensible narrative pattern. The 
first hint the fictional world is not intended to stand for the world of 
experience tells us that we are not in reportorial mode, but in some other 
form of discourse in which chronology may be violated; in which causality 
is less important than teleology—the direction things are headed; and in 
which characters are defined primarily by their roles in bringing the story 
to its conclusion and only secondarily by their individual traits and 
interactions. 

There was a time when this division, between story and history, did 
not exist or seemed unimportant. Italo Calvino has written a plausible 
reconstruction of origins of the earliest recorded magical narrative, which 
we usually call myth. He points out that the elements of a myth are the 
everyday realities in the life of what he calls the “tribal storyteller.” 
Hypothesizing a South American background, though any other would 
do, he mentions jaguars and toucans as typical actors, chess pieces for the 
game of story. For possible actions, we might have hunting, flying, eating, 
drinking, mating, and dying—assuming only the jaguar and toucan as 
sources of inspiration. Then what Calvino calls the “combinatorial game” 
begins. Jaguar hunts, toucan flies, she-jaguar meets he-jaguar, toucan flies 
too close and dies. The storyteller gets bolder: toucan tries hunting, 
jaguar learns to fly, dead she-jaguar returns to haunt he-jaguar. The magic 
which is narrative possibility takes these simple facts and transforms them 
until eventually the teller achieves a narrative symmetry which is recog- 
nized by his listeners. They, then, are compelled to retell that particular 
story, refining it further, until it becomes what we call a myth. 

The modern storyteller likewise can assemble actors and events and 
attempt to combine them into myth, but two key ingredients from Cal- 
vino’s mythmaking scenario are lacking. One is the context in which 
storytelling could spill over into ritual and belief. The other, which is 





Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 131 


related to the first, is the availability of a whole set of game pieces without 
which the game lacks a level of combinatorial possibility. 

The tribal storyteller’s world included jaguar and toucan, and so he 
could readily transform their movements and attributes into narrative. But 
Calvino does not mention that the storyteller’s world also included 
ghosts, walking trees, and ancestors who were both jaguar and human. 
These things were also parts of reality: ghosts looked a certain way, spoke 
a certain way. The storyteller knew: he had seen them. These elements did 
more than merely add to the storyteller’s repertoire. They transformed 
everything else within it. 

A simple tale was likely to explode “into a terrible revelation,” as 
Calvino says (79), because toucan and jaguar and storyteller and listener 
were already connected in a web of kinship and transformation and 
magic, a web that was known through the stories but extended well 
beyond their boundaries. 

Combining the familiar with the magical, which was also familiar, the 
tribal storyteller created a mythic discourse. The writer of indigenous 
fantasy is attempting to recreate that discourse from two now sundered 
sources. The magical web is no longer part of the discourse of everyday 
reality, and so our novels and histories do not explode so easily into myth. 
But the discourse of magic, which is roped off into fantasy worlds, has lost 
something as well. 

The great advantage of the discourse of reporting is its property of 
extension. Once we know we are in a story in reportorial mode, we can 
extend the narrator’s observations in any direction. If the story mentions 
London, we can assume Paris. We can fill in Tower Bridge and the dome of 
St. Paul’s, whether or not they are invoked specifically. We can supply 
Henry VIII and Victoria, Samuel Johnson and Virginia Woolf. Even the 
least well-read can provide traffic and parks and shops and cinemas to fill 
in the background of what the narrator actually chooses to notice. UI- 
timately the world of the story extends in an unbroken path to the reader’s 
own doorstep. Thus the reader does a lot of the hard work of bringing a 
story to life. 

Occasionally, of course, our observations and the narrator’s will fail to 
agree, but generally we can set these lapses aside. If snakes are described 
as slimy or Boise as east of Butte, we can blame authorial ignorance or 
narrator’s unreliability and assume the rest of the fictional world corre- 
sponds point for point with our own models of reality. 

What if, however, the narrator speaks of clouds colliding overhead, or 
describes a troupe of tiny people hoisting sail in a bathtub. The link with 
our own surroundings is broken: there is no continuous path from such a 


132 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


scene to our own space. We are forced to interpret such descriptions as 
statements in another mode of discourse: metaphors, perhaps, in a meta- 
physical poem, or hallucinations that will be disavowed later in the 
narrative, or metafictional trickery. If no such explanation works, then 
these sorts of incidents force our reidentification of the whole narrative 
into the discourse of the wonder tale or fantasy. 

Once that identification is made, the principle of extension ceases to 
operate. No longer can we be sure that the fictional London is situated 
across the Channel from a fictional Paris or that its history matches any 
part of the history we know. We know nothing for certain until the 
narrator tells us it is so. Is the sky blue? Is the world round? Perhaps, but 
don’t bet on it. 

Yet the reader needs some way of filling in at least an approximation of 
the story’s background, so that each item named does not emerge from 
empty space. Otherwise the storyteller’s discourse will be overburdened 
with naming: 


A man sat under a tree. The man was bilaterally symmetrical, made of 
flesh and blood, about six feet tall, with hair on one end and boots on the 
other. The tree was green-leafed and grey-barked. It could not speak. 
“Under” means touching the ground, in the direction of gravity’s pull. 


It is impossible—everything specified calls for further specification, so that 
no story could ever advance beyond its beginning point. 

This is the reason that so many fantasies suffer from a certain thinness 
even while they seem to be overdetermined. Most fantasy worlds are 
radically reduced from the richness of actual experience. 

What a fantasist can do to compensate is direct readers to a storytell- 
ing tradition for filling in inessential background. Although fairy tales are 
radically discontinuous with history, they are in a sense continuous with 
other fairy tales. As a way of filling in the empty fictional space, narrators 
refer the reader to the European fairy tale and romance tradition. Instead 
of an absolute void to mark off as best they can, many storytellers settle 
for a familiar and coherent landscape in which clouds can possibly clash 
and fairies go sailing. In most cases this is essentially a simplified version 
of the Middle Ages. Writers are attempting to rehistoricize fantastic 
assertions by placing them within an approximation of the most accessi- 
ble milieu in which such statements could have been made within the 
discourse of reporting. Unfortunately, most contemporary fantasists lack 
the depth of antiquarian knowledge that allowed Tolkien or Morris to 
roam freely in a reconstructed medieval world. Nor do most fantasists, 
especially in America, have access to locales where fairy tale and legend 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 133 


are still a part of local culture, as they are in Alan Garner’s Cheshire or 
Susan Cooper’s Thames Valley. 

For these reasons, borrowing a milieu from old stories is likely to 
result in settings that seem flimsy and flat, like cardboard stage sets. Yet, 
on the other hand, the magical web of relations that justifies a fairy tale’s 
happy ending cannot be supported in a realistic narrative: it dissolves into 
coincidence and authorial intervention. The more carefully a writer 
shapes a narrative in historical mode, the more improbable it becomes. 

In a fantastic tale, the deck is allowed—is even required—to be stacked 
in favor of the hero, for that is a hero’s narrative function. The realistically 
conceived protagonist, though, has no such dispensation, and any sign of 
predisposition in his favor registers as sentimentality. An engineered reso- 
lution would imply that the story’s outcome, like its characters and 
setting, derives from the real world, that the universe is ready to step in on 
the side of good, and we are no longer prepared to accept such a claim. 

Yet a number of writers have attempted to find ways of combining—or 
rather recombining—these two types of discourse. Using American set- 
tings in which the mythic fusion of magic and everyday life does not linger 
even in memory, they have attempted to recapture ihe medieval or tribal 
storyteller’s ability to feed observation into fantasy. Those who have 
succeeded have constructed narratives in which the inevitable falling-into- 
place of fantasy governs a world that seems continuous with the reader’s 
experience. 

Megan Lindholm’s Wizard of the Pigeons (1986) illustrates the pro- 
cess. Like many writers of indigenous fantasy, Lindholm wrote Other 
World stories first and then turned to materials closer to hand, to try to 
integrate scenes and incidents from her hometown of Seattle, Washington, 
into a wonder tale. 

To do so, she had to find a way of convincing readers that her Seattle is 
indeed the contemporary West Coast city they have seen or read about 
and at the same time a fantasy world in which impossible events demon- 
strate a secret and wondrous order, which will govern the course of the 
tale. 

The wizard of the title is a street person. He is one of those people 
with too many layers of clothing, who launch into improbable con- 
versations with strangers or with the empty air, who make us uncomfort- 
able without threatening us, so that our usual response is to avert our eyes 
and walk past. In that averting of eyes is the rationale for making such a 
claim. Why can’t an invisible person be doing impossible things? If we 
were to see him, for once, and, more importantly, to see what he sees, he 
could indeed be a wizard, and the area of Seattle marked by the bound- 
aries of the public transit Ride Free Zone a fairyland. 





134 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


What Lindholm must do is encourage the reader to accept Wizard’s 
view of things (his role is also his name). He must not be merely derelict or 
incompetent, and so the vagaries of his behavior are presented in such a 
way that they seem in harmony with his surroundings: 


On such a day the cries of the gulls seem to drown out the traffic noises, 
and the fresh salt breath of the ocean is stronger than the exhaust of the 
passing cars. . . . The possibilities of the day tugged at Wizard’s mind like 
a kite tugs on a string. So, although he had been standing for some time at 
a bus stop, when the bus finally came snorting into sight, he wandered 
away from the other passengers, letting his feet follow their own inclina- 
tion. (2) 


The description helps validate the point of view. Only after we have 
shared Wizard’s pleasure in the bright October sunshine and listened to 
his internal guided tour of historic Seattle are we confronted by evidence 
that his thinking processes might be a little askew. Wizard has dropped 
into a curiosity shop to visit a friend: 


“So how’s it going, old man?” Wizard greeted him softly. 
Sylvester gave a dry cough and began, “It was a hot and dusty day. . .” 
Wizard listened, politely nodding. It was the only story Sylvester had to 
tell, and Wizard was one of the few who could hear it. (3) 


Sylvester is a mummy, “one of the best naturally preserved mummies 
existent in the western United States. It said so right on the placard beside 
his display case” (4). 

Although we have doubts about a man who talks to mummies—and 
listens to them—the narrator counters our doubts with the idea that there 
is an unrecorded truth behind historical documentation. The pamphlets 
accompanying the display 


told everything there was to know, except who he had been, and why he 
had died in the sandy wastes from a bullet wound. And those secrets were 
the ones he whispered to Wizard, speaking in a voice as dry and dusty as 
his unmarked grave had been, in words so soft they barely passed the glass 
that separated them. (4) 


In this way, Lindholm establishes that Wizard is not merely an eccen- 
tric having delusions. He is somehow more in touch with both the 
physical presence and the historical background of the mummy than are 
either the writers of the pamphlets or the conventional people who glance 
into the shop. His life on the streets justifies a cockeyed perspective on 
what is or is not physically possible, thereby bringing the discourse of the 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 135 


fantastic into play. At the same time, it also allows the narrator to lay 
claim to the chief validating mechanisms of realistic discourse: detailed 
description and reference to history. Wizard’s special insight into history 
is translated into the discourse of fantasy when it is understood that its 
source is his receptiveness to the mummy’s story: its transformation of 
mere event into a ritualized narrative directed toward an already known 
end. 

From this encounter, the story moves toward more explicitly fantastic 
events, but always within the limits of Wizard’s lifestyle and point of view. 
A mechanical gypsy in the curiosity shop slips Wizard a warning on a 
Tarot card. We learn about Wizard’s special gift, which is to have things 
come to him unbidden. Knowledge of a stranger’s affairs is simply there 
when he needs it, just as clothing, food, shelter, and sometimes small 
change make themselves available: 


He had found a box of tea bags in the dumpster in the alley behind the 
health food store. The corner of the box was crushed, but the tea bags 
were intact in their brightly colored envelopes. ... In a dumpster four 
blocks away, he had found two packets of tall candles, each broken in 
several places, bur still quite useful. An excellent morning. The magic was 
flowing today, and the light was still before him. (13) 


Details that could be arranged into a sociological study of the home- 
less here contribute to the fantasy because they are interpreted as magical, 
which is to say as Wizard’s power and fate working in tandem. 

Wizard meets other wizards: Rasputin, Euripides, and the most 
powerful, Cassie. Cassie comes and goes through many Seattles, leading 
Wizard through doors that weren’t there before she appeared, into the 
past or the city that might have been had there been no fire at the turn of 
the century. She never looks the same twice. Lindholm takes evident 
pleasure in describing in great detail the physical appearance that would 
define and restrict Cassie in a realistic narrative, but here tells us only that 
we don’t know Cassie’s limits. 

Cassie is, in a sense, the discourse of the fantastic itself. She is the one 
who explains the art of wizardry to Wizard, and her explanations always 
take the form of stories. She draws part of her power from children’s 
rhymes, the simple narratives to which little girls jump rope. She is known 
to the reader primarily through her stories and through her role in this 
story, which is the one who tells truths the listener is not prepared to 
understand. She is both fictional and metafictional. After telling one vivid 
story about the bombing of Norwich, she is asked by Wizard if she was 
really there at the beginning of World War II. Her answer is, “That story is 
always told in the first person” (74). 


136 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


With these clues before us, by the midpoint of the book we are able to 
spot Cassie in a rapid succession of guises. We recognize the battered 
vagrant, the neat white-haired woman, the short curly-haired Jewish 
woman, the stout little black woman, the slender Polynesian, the young 
student, simply because any person appearing at those moments, saying 
the kinds of things they are saying, has to be Cassie. 

Through Cassie’s stories and Wizard’s gifts, we come to see the city of 
Seattle, its physical presence and its history, as fully encompassed by the 
magical tale. Even poverty, prostitution, and violence can enter into the 
ordering mechanism of story, as Wizard exercises his power to heal 
victims of these urban diseases. 

Wizard’s own story involves learning to control the relationship of 
present and past. His past is dominated by violence and despair: he was a 
sniper in Vietnam, possibly a prisoner of the Vietcong. At one point in the 
book that past threatens to reemerge and define him not as Wizard but as 
Mitchell Ignatius Reilly, emotionally maimed veteran. As long as that is 
the only past he possesses, he can only function by cutting it off, keeping 
the documents that would tie him to it locked away in a box in a trunk in 
an attic of the deserted building he has made his home. But the past still 
lurks, unacknowledged. The box marked with his initials becomes a focus 
for evil: the residue of evil from the war, the many small evils of urban life, 
the evil impulses that he has been trained to make use of as a soldier. All of 
these coalesce in a gray presence called MIR. 

Wizard can defeat MIR neither by denying the past nor by resuming 
his old identity. He must find a new identity, which involves crossing over 
to a new narrative line. Instead of being Mitch Reilly, whose past is 
unbearable and whose future is hopeless, he must find a past and future 
for Wizard. Here Cassie can help, for her stories hold many pasts. All he 
needs to do is find a story, like the one of the bombing of Norwich, that 
can be told in the first person, or rather that be can tell, truthfully, in the 
first person. 

MIR tries to impose a story on Wizard. It throws him into a memory, 
a narrative about young boys killing a pet black rooster and at the same 
time learning a lesson in violence and indifference to cruelty. The only 
question is whose memory it is: which of the boys was Wizard? 

But that question is a trap. Cassie shows Wizard how to break the 
chain of cause and effect and turn realistic narrative into magical. “I 
remembered being all those boys, as soon as the grayness showed them to 
me,” says Wizard. “Yet having seen them I would not choose to have been 
any of them.” 

“Don’t you see?” responds Cassie. “You were there, yes. But you were 


the Black Rooster” (75). 
If Wizard could have been the Black Rooster, he could have had other 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 137 


lives as well. One story Cassie gives him early in the novel provides a 
particularly useful past if the identity he is looking for is that of a magic- 
maker and hero. It is about a young girl and an old man robed in blue 
who teaches her about herbs and magic. Wizard does not recognize 
himself in the story—he even makes fun of it: “And the old man was 
Merlin, and the little girl was Cassie. The End” (63). But the little girl was 
Cassie, and the old man may have been Merlin but was certainly Wizard, 
and it isn’t the End. 

When he learns that his true past lies in stories, Wizard is freed to fight 
MIR in the present, and his own narrative can hook up with the happy 
ending appropriate to a fairy tale. The episode of the Vietnam War, like 
that of the Black Rooster, is safely encapsulated as an episode, a necessary 
trial along the way, instead of an open-ended nightmare. The past can be 
harrowing so long as the whole has a purpose and a resolution. 

Lindholm has constructed a narrative that says, by its very shape, that 
telling magical tales may be a way of taking control of an otherwise 
unmanageable reality. Other writers of indigenous fantasy similarly de- 
scribe how the fantastic mode can take possession of realistic discourse, 
utilizing narrative strategies comparable to Lindholm’s filtering reality 
through the eyes of an urban scavenger. 

As a result, these stories share a particular concreteness that is the 
farthest thing from the vague settings of purely derivative fantasy. 
Lindholm’s Seattle, Peter Beagle’s Berkeley, Emma Bull’s Minneapolis, and 
Nancy Willard’s Ann Arbor provide firm ground and vivid detail to the 
narratives, a familiar phenomenon in autobiography or local-color writ- 
ing, but rather new to fantasy. One can feel the author’s relish in placing 
magical incidents on real street corners and turning acquaintances into 
fairies and mages. 

The point of view character in most of these fantasies is in some way 
marginal, not among those who are authorized to make judgments about 
what is real or appropriate. Sheri S. Tepper and Eleanor Arnason use a 
woman’s perspective, Orson Scott Card and Nancy Willard use a child’s, 
Diana Paxson and Peter Beagle draw on the medieval revival movement, 
and Emma Bull and R. A. MacAvoy make musicians serve as representa- 
tives of those whose needs and interests are not served by consensus 
reality. What is required seems to be a perspective close enough to 
common sense to allow for a sense of continuity with the reader’s world 
but at the same time open to impossible events and miraculous explana- 
tions. We may not believe, for instance, that Wizard’s magic brings him 
quarters when he craves coffee or enables him to feed pigeons out of an 
inexhaustible bag of popcorn, but we believe someone like Wizard could 
believe it, and his receptiveness allows our temporary acquiescence. 

The transitional point of view, however, need not be that of a true 





138 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


believer in the supernatural. It just has to be someone who can, like 
Wizard, tell the magical tale to us. In a curious way, John Crowley is able 
to use Smoky Barnable’s skepticism to allay our own in Little, Big, and to 
generate through Smoky’s perceptions a whole anthology of modes of 
discourse. At the same time, Smoky allows the reader to make use of that 
sense of continuity from which realistic narratives derive so much of their 
solidity. 

Smoky is a sort of displaced person in the twentieth century. Educated 


by his father, 


at sixteen, Smoky knew Latin, classical and medieval; Greek; some old- 
fashioned mathematics; and he could play the violin a little. He had 
smelled few books other than his father’s leather-bound classics; he could 
recite two hundred lines of Virgil more or less accurately; and he wrote in 
a perfect Chancery hand. (6) 


This education has effectively isolated Smoky, just as Wizard’s war 
experience cut him off from the concerns of the ordinary residents of 
Seattle. Smoky, with no marketable skills, a very imperfect knowledge of 
current events, and no confidence in his own ability to make judgments 
about reality, is ready to be drawn into a group whose view of the world 
is, if odd, at least secure. This is the Drinkwater family. They maintain a 
set of beliefs dating from the middle of the last century, the age of spirit 
rapping, reincarnation, and photographs of the fairies. 

Marriage to Alice Drinkwater brings Smoky into the midst of a colony 
of heirs to the great nineteenth-century wave of spiritualist frenzy, now 
isolated but still thriving like sea creatures in a tide pool. His marriage 
also brings Smoky in contact with a number of eccentric and fantastic 
forms of narrative discourse, which help thicken the texture of the magic 
tale by giving us more ways to pour our own experiences into it. 

We can credit the style of the book’s opening to Smoky’s upbringing. 
This is how he would introduce himself, drawing on those leather-bound 
volumes of his childhood: 


On a certain day in June, 19—, a young man was making his way on foot 
northward from the great City to a town or place called Edgewood, that he 
had been told of but had never visited. (3) 


Though the City is obviously New York and the unspecified date 
sometime in the 1960s, Smoky never really lives in that setting, for it does 
not fit the language he has for describing reality. The only connection he 
establishes there is with George Mouse, a Drinkwater cousin, and the 
quality of their relationship is conveyed through Smoky’s peculiar vocabu- 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 139 


lary: “by then he and Smoky had become, as only Smoky in the whole 
world it seemed could any longer say with all seriousness, fast friends” (9). 

Through George, Smoky meets Alice, and soon thereafter starts his 
journey to Edgewood, a place where an expression like “fast friends” is the 
least extraordinary sort of utterance. One of the pleasures in reading 
Little, Big is to trace the models from which the language of Edgewood is 
compounded, from Winnie the Pooh to Madame Blavatsky to Little 
Nemo in Slumberland. 

Smoky’s language is so much at home in this place that he is willing to 
suspend judgment on the parts of Edgewood that do not fit his notions of 
reality, such as talking animals: 


“You said someone told you. . .” 

“Spark,” she said. “Or someone like him.” 

She looked closely at him, and he tried to compose his features into a 
semblance of pleasant attention. “Spark is the dog,” he said. (15) 


Once established at Edgewood, Smoky is surrounded by odd and old- 
fashioned narratives, such as Dr. Drinkwater’s children’s books, Great- 
Aunt Cloud’s Tarot readings, Sophie’s recountings of her dreams, and 
Great-Grandfather John Drinkwater’s theosophical musings, with which 
the later editions of his architecture books were encrusted. Smoky never 
realizes that these narrating voices surrounding him are all speaking literal 
truth and all of a piece. Even though Smoky never really understands or 
believes, however, he is content to make believe. His stance—bemused, 
delighted, accepting without entirely trusting—is the reader’s. Then, 
starting from that acquiescence, the reader finds the intertwining dis- 
courses of Edgewood reaching out to encompass other places and times, 
even the great City. History is engulfed by story, as it was once before, in 
the Middle Ages, when a historical figure like Emperor Frederick Barba- 
rossa could find his way into the legend of the sleeping king under the 
mountain. As if to show the similarity, Crowley brings Barbarossa out of 
his sleep and into this story as well. 

Smoky’s son Auberon Barnable also brings the reader in contact with 
a more contemporary kind of history. During his stay in the City, Auberon 
becomes for a time a scavenger much like Lindholm’s Wizard: 


He had thrown himself on the City’s mercy, and found that, like a strict 
mistress, she was kind to those who submitted utterly, held nothing back. 
By degrees he learned to do that; he who had always been fastidious . . . 
grew filthy, City dirt worked itself into his fabric ineradicably .... By 
autumn his knapsack was a useless rag, a cerement, and anyway had 
ceased to be large enough to hold a life lived on the streets; so like the rest 





140 STRATEGIES OF FANTASY 


of the secret City’s epopts he carried paper shopping bags, one inside the 
other for strength, advertising in his degraded person many great estab- 
lishments in turn. (379) 


In this description, with its precise and arcane vocabulary, we can hear 
Auberon’s self-dramatization, and behind that the accents of his father and 
teacher Smoky. Though Auberon’s period of dereliction is only episode 
one among many, it serves here the same function as Wizard’s cutting 
loose from conventionality: it makes the impossible seem only unex- 
pected, and no more unexpected at that than any of the meetings and 
acquisitions in a wholly unplanned life. 

Auberon passes through his derelict stage and goes home, but like 
Wizard he has had the course of his life changed. He is now ready to take 
up his role in the story, and it is at this point that he is given bis new name 
and fabulous past. He finds out for the first time, for instance, that his 
City misadventure, triggered by the disappearance of his lover Sylvie, was 
engineered by supernatural beings. They are the same supernatural 
beings, indeed, who turned his great-grandfather August Drinkwater into 
a trout, another new fact in a now unpredictable past. Auberon is given 
both facts by an evidently reliable source, the trout itself, who promises 
that there will be a gift in compensation for Auberon’s woes. Crowley 
wonderfully captures the fishy and prophetic discourse of its thoughts: 


Grandfather Trout’s was not an affectionate soul, not now, not after all 
hese years; but this was after spring, and the boy was after all flesh of his 
esh, or so they said. He hoped anyway that if there was a gift in it, it 
vouldn’t be one that would cause the boy any great suffering. (412) 


Eventually Auberon becomes fully a function of the story, a fantastic 
being, Oberon to Sylvie’s Titania. Other characters are similarly nar- 
ratized. Their realistic attributes are simplified and intensified until they 
become pure narrative movements, which is to say mythic beings. Only 
Smoky retains the complexities and doubts that make him a realistic 
character, that keep him just on the threshold of the world of Faery, where 
he can look but not enter, neither believing nor disbelieving. He must stay 
in that halfway state if he is to continue to bridge the many sorts of 
discourse and thereby let us part way into the plot: 


... Smoky was willing, willing to take on this task, to take exception to 
none of it, to live his life for the convenience of others in whom he had 
never even quite believed, and spend his substance bringing about the end 
of a Tale in which he did not figure. (531) 


The substance Smoky has to spend is, in a sense, his discourse, which 


Recapturing the Modern World for the Imagination 141 


holds together so many strands of language and plot. The “others” whose 
convenience he has served are ourselves, the audience, as well as the 
unseen troupe of fairies. As to the last clause above, he does, of course, 
figure in the Tale, for it has become his Tale even more than it is the 
Drinkwater family’s, at least from our perspective. 

When the story is all worked out, everyone dead or vanished or 
transformed, and even Smoky no longer there to anchor the fairy tale in 
reality, the narrative concludes with a passage of essentially realistic, 
though lyrical, discourse, as a way of showing what has vanished: 


It was anyway all a long time ago; the world, we know now, is as it is and 
not different; if there was ever a time where there were passages, doors, the 
borders open and many a crossing, that time is not now. The world is 
older than it was. Even the weather isn’t as we remember it clearly once 
being; never lately does there come a summer day such as we remember, 
never clouds as white as that, never grass as odorous or shade as deep and 
full of promise as we remember they can be, as once upon a time they 
were. (538) 


The real world, “as it is and not different,” says Crowley’s narrative, is 
empty without the world “once upon a time” that comes into being only 
in story. New York is no place unless it is also the City, teeming with 
elegance and vice and with all the stories into which those temptations 
can lead young heroes. The countryside, too, needs its stories, like 
Smoky’s getting lost in the woods and meeting Mother Nature, whom he 
takes, not wrongly, for a neighbor of the Drinkwaters’. It needs Smoky’s 
honeymoon in the moonlight on an island in a lake, and Alice’s walking 
backward into a rainbow. These stories transform the world so that it is 
never without wonder: even Crowley’s lament for lost beauty creates the 
image of that beauty. 

It is unlikely that any of the indigenous fantasists intend readers to 
begin living like Wizard or expecting the fairies to bring about a transfor- 
mation in their lives. When you convert history into story, you end up with 
precisely and only that—a story. Yet stories, by being different from 
nature or history, make nature accessible and history meaningful. 

Fantasy, by its structure, emphasizes the difference between fiction and 
life, a difference which our critical tradition seemed for a long time to be 
determined to erase. Indigenous fantasy shows that fiction and life are not 
only separate but complementary. Those eccentric viewpoints sought by 
fantasists as a way of justifying divergence from the strictly representa- 
tional are probably as useful to the writer as to the reader. They are 
enabling mechanisms, ways of evading the rational censor, so that our 
own tribal storytellers can resume their proper function, reclaim their 
unique discourse, and recapture the modern world for the imagination. 





Works Cited 


Abel, Elizabeth, Marianne Hirsch, and Elizabeth Langland, eds. The Voyage In: 
Fictions of Female Development. Hanover: UP of New England, 1983. 

Alexander, Lloyd. The Black Cauldron. New York: Holt, 1965. 

. The Book of Three. New York: Holt, 1964. 

. The Castle of Llyr. New York: Holt, 1966. 

. The High King. New York: Holt, 1968. 

. Taran Wanderer. New York: Holt, 1967. 

Anstey, F. (Thomas Anstey Guthrie). Vice Versa. London: Murray, 1882. 

Arnason, Eleanor. Daughter of the Bear King. New York: Avon, 1987. 

Attebery, Brian. The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature: From Irving to Le 
Guin. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1980. 

Auerbach, Erich. Mimesis: The Representation of Reality in Western Literature. 
Trans. Willard Trask. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1953. 

Baldwin, Karen. “Family Narratives as First Memories of Childhood.” Conference 
paper, American Folklore Society. San Diego, CA, 13 October 1984. 

Barfield, Owen. Poetic Diction: A Study in Meaning. 2d ed., rpt. with an intro- 
duction by Howard Nemerov. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. 

Barth, John. Chimera. New York: Random, 1972. 

. “The Literature of Exhaustion.” The Atlantic August 1967: 29-34. 

. “The Literature of Replenishment.” The Atlantic January 1980: 65-71. 

Beagle, Peter. The Folk of the Air. New York: Ballantine, 1986. 

Bleiler, E. E, ed. Supernatural Fiction Writers: Fantasy and Horror. 2 vols. New 
York: Scribner’s, 1985. 

Borges, Jorge Luis. “Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote.” Labyrinths. Trans. 
James E. Irby. New York: New Directions, 1962. Rpt. in Fantastic Worlds: 
Myths, Tales, and Stories. Ed. Eric S$. Rabkin. New York: Oxford UP, 1979. 
415-23. 

Bradley, Marion Zimmer. The World Wreckers. Boston: Gregg, 1979. 

Brooke-Rose, Christine. A Rhetoric of the Unreal: Studies in Narrative and 
Structure, Especially of the Fantastic. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 198r. 

Brown, Fredric. Angels and Spaceships. New York: Dutton, 1954. 

Brownstein, Rachel M. Becoming a Heroine: Reading about Women in Novels. 
New York: Viking, 1982. 

Bull, Emma. War for the Oaks. New York: Ace, 1987. 

Burroughs, Edgar Rice. The Gods of Mars. All-Story, 1913; tpt. Chicago: Mc- 
Clurg, 1918. 

_ A Princess of Mars. All-Story, 1912, as “Under the Moons of Mars”; rpt. 
Chicago: McClurg, 1917. 

Butler, Octavia E. Wild Seed. Garden City: Doubleday, 1980. 

Calvino, Italo. The Castle of Crossed Destinies. Trans. William Weaver, New 
York: Harcourt, 1977. 























143 


144 Works Cited 





. Cosmicomics. Trans. William Weaver. New York: Harcourt, 1968. 

. “Myth in the Narrative.” Trans. Erica Freiberg. In Surfiction: Fiction 
Now ... and Tomorrow. Ed. Raymond Federman. Chicago: Swallow, 1975. 
75-81. 

Card, Orson Scott. Seventh Son. New York: TOR, 1987. 

Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton, 1977. 

Cawelti, John. Adventure, Mystery, and Romance: Formula Stories and Popular 
Culture. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1976. 

Chatman, Seymour. Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in Fiction and Film. 
Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1978. 

Clifton, Michael. “Jewels of Wonder, Instruments of Delight: Science Fiction, 
Fantasy, and Science Fantasy as Vision-Inducing Works.” In Intersections: 
Fantasy and Science Fiction. Ed. George E. Slusser and Eric §. Rabkin. Carbon- 
dale: Southern Illinois UP, 1987. 97—106. 

Cowper, Richard. The Road to Corlay. New York: Pocket, 1979. 

Crowley, John. Agypt. New York: Bantam, 1987. 

. Engine Summer. New York: Bantam, 1980. 

. “From Unthank to Glasgow and Back.” New York Times Book Review 5 

May 1985: 14-15. 

. Little, Big. New York: Bantam, 1981. 

Culler, Jonathan. On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism after Structuralism. 
Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1982. 

de Camp, L. Sprague, and Fletcher Pratt. The Compleat Enchanter: The Magical 
Misadventures of Harold Shea, containing “The Roaring Trumpet” (1940), 
“The Mathematics of Magic” (1940), and “The Castle of Iron” (1941). New 
York: Ballantine, 1975. 

. Wall of Serpents, containing “The Wall of Serpents” (1953) and “The 
Green Magician” (1954). New York: Dell, 1979. 

Delany, Samuel R. The Einstein Intersection. New York: Ace, 1967. 

de Lint, Charles. Moonheart. New York: Ace, 1984. 

Dickson, Gordon. The Dragon and the George. Garden City: Doubleday, 1976. 

Donaldson, Stephen. “Epic Fantasy in the Modern World.” Kent State University 
Library Occasional Papers, 2nd Series, No. 2. Kent, OH: Kent State Library, 
n.d. 

Eastman, Max. The Sense of Humor. New York: Scribner’s, 1922. 

Elgin, Don D. The Comedy of the Fantastic: Ecological Perspectives on the 
Fantasy Novel. Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and Fantasy, 
Number 15. Westport: Greenwood, 1985. 

Elgin, Suzette Haden. The Ozark Trilogy, consisting of Twelve Fair Kingdoms, 
The Grand Jubilee, and And Then There'll Be Fireworks. Book Club Edition. 
Garden City: Doubleday, 1981. 

Eliade, Mircea. Rites and Symbols of Initiation: The Mysteries of Birth and 
Rebirth. Trans. Willard R. Trask. New York: Harper, 1958. 

Flieger, Verlyn. Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World. Grand 
Rapids: Eerdmans, 1983. 

Forster, E. M. Aspects of the Novel. New York: Harcourt, 1927. 

Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton: Princeton UP, 
1957. 

skh The Secular Scripture: A Study of the Structure of Romance. Cambridge, 

MA: Harvard UP, 1976. 




















Works Cited 145 


Garner, Alan. “A Bit More Practice.” The Times Literary Supplement 6 June 
1968. Rpt. in The Cool Web: The Pattern of Children’s Reading. Ed. Margaret 
Meek, Aidan Warlow, and Griselda Barton. New York: Atheneum, 1978. 196— 
200. 





. Elidor. 1965; rpt. New York: Ballantine, 1981. 

. The Moon of Gomrath. 1963; rpt. New York: Ballantine, 1981. 

. The Owl Service. London: Collins, 1967. 

. Red Shift. London: Collins, 1973. 

. The Weirdstone of Brisingamen. 1960; rpt. New York: Ballantine, 1981. 

Genette, Gérard. Narrative Discourse: An Essay in Method. Trans. Jane E. Lewin. 
Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1980. 

Gerrold, David. Moonstar Odyssey. New York: Signet, 1977. 

Grant, Patrick. “Tolkien: Archetype and Word.” In Tolkien: Netw Critical Per- 
spectives. Ed. Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Lexington, KY: UP of 
Kentucky, 1981. 87-105. 

Hamilton, Virginia. Justice and Her Brothers. New York: Greenwillow, 1978. 

Hazel, Paul. Undersea. Boston: Little, 1982. 

Heilbrun, Carolyn G. Reinventing Womanhood. New York: Norton, 1979. 

Heinlein, Robert E. Glory Road. New York: Putnam’s, 1964. 

Helprin, Mark. Winter’s Tale. New York: Harcourt, 1983. 

Hume, Kathryn. Fantasy and Mimesis: Responses to Reality in Western Liter- 
ature. New York: Methuen, 1984. 

Ingelow, Jean. Mopsa the Fairy. London: Longmans, 1869. Rpt. in A Christmas 
Carol by Charles Dickens; and Other Victorian Fairy Tales by John Ruskin, 
W. M. Thackeray, George MacDonald, and Jean Ingelow. Selected by U. C. 
Knoepflmacher. New York: Bantam, 1983. 

Irwin, W. R. The Game of the Impossible: A Rhetoric of Fantasy. Urbana: U of 
Illinois P, 1976. 

Isaacs, Neil D., and Rose A. Zimbardo, eds. Tolkien and the Critics: Essays on 
J. R. R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings. Notre Dame: U of Notre Dame P, 
1968. 

Jackson, Rosemary. Fantasy: The Literature of Subversion. New York: Methuen, 
1981. 

Jacobs, Joseph. English Folk and Fairy Tales. 3rd ed. revised. New York: Put- 
nam’s, n.d. 

Jameson, Fredric. “Magical Narrative: Romance as Genre.” New Literary History 
7:1 (Autumn 1975): 135-63. 

. “Postmodernism, or The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism.” New Left 

Review 146 (July-August 1984): 53-94. 

. “Science Fiction as a Spatial Genre: Generic Discontinuittes and the 
Problem of Figuration in Vonda MclIntyre’s The Exile Waiting.” Science-Fiction 
Studies 14 (March 1987): 44-59. 

Jaynes, Julian. The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral 
Mind. Boston: Houghton, 1976. 

Jones, Diana Wynne. Archer’s Goon. New York: Greenwillow, 1984. 

. Fire and Hemlock. New York: Greenwillow, 1985. 

. “The Shape of the Narrative in The Lord of the Rings.” In J. R. R. 

Tolkien: This Far Land. Ed. Robert Giddings. London: Vision, 1983. 87—107. 

. The Spell-Coats. New York: Atheneum, 1979. 

. The Time of the Ghost. London: Macmillan, 1984. 























| 


146 Works Cited 


Koestler, Arthur. The Act of Creation. New York: Macmillan, 1964. 

. “Humour and Wit.” Encyclopaedia Britannica: Macropaedia, 1974. 

Kress, Nancy. Prince of the Morning Bells. New York: Pocket, 1981. 

Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson. Metaphors We Live By. Chicago: U of 
Chicago P, 1980. 

Laumer, Keith. The Time Bender. New York: Ace, 1981. 

Le Guin, Ursula K. City of Illusions. New York: Ace, 1967. 

. The Farthest Shore. New York: Atheneum, 1972. 

. The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy and Science Fiction. Ed. 

Susan Wood. New York: Putnam’s, 1979. 

. The Left Hand of Darkness. New York: Ace, 1969. 

. Planet of Exile. New York: Ace, 1966. 

. Rocannon’s World. New York: Ace, 1966. 

. “Spike the Canon.” SFRA Newsletter 169 (July/August 1989): 17—21. 

. Tebanu: The Last Book of Earthsea. New York: Atheneum, 1990. 

. The Tombs of Atuan. New York: Atheneum, 1971. 

. A Wizard of Earthsea. Berkeley: Parnassus, 1968. 

Lewis, C. S. “De Descriptione Temporum.” In Selected Literary Essays. Ed. 
Walter Hooper. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1969. 1-14. 

. Of Other Worlds: Essays and Stories. Ed. Walter Hooper. New York: 

Harcourt, 1966. 

Out of the Silent Planet. London: Lane, 1938. 

Lincoln, Bruce. Emerging from the Chrysalis: Studies in Rituals of Women’s 
Initiation. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1981. 

Lindholm, Megan. Wizard of the Pigeons. New York: Ace, 1986. 

Longstreth, Richard. “Bernard Maybeck.” In Master Builders: A Guide to Fa- 
mous American Architects. Ed. Dianne Maddex. Washington: National Trust 
for Historic Preservation, 1985. 128-31. 

Lundell, Torborg. “Gender-Related Biases in the Type and Motif Indexes of Aarne 
and Thompson.” In Fairy Tales and Society: Illusion, Allusion, and Paradigm. 
Ed. Ruth B. Bottigheimer. Philadelphia: U of Pennsylvania P, 1986. 149-63. 

MacAvoy, R. A. Tea with the Black Dragon. New York: Bantam, 1983. 

MacDonald, George. Phantastes: A Faerie Romance for Men and Women. 
London: Smith, Elder, 1858. Rpt. in Phantastes and Lilith. Grand Rapids, MI: 
Eerdmans, 1964. 

MacDonald, John D. The Girl, the Gold Watch, and Everything. Greenwich: 
Fawcett, 1962. 

McKillip, Patricia A. Riddle of Stars, consisting of The Riddle-Master of Hed 
(1976), Heir of Sea and Fire (1977), and Harpist in the Wind (1979). Book 
Club Edition. Garden City: Doubleday, n.d. 

Makkreel, Rudolph A. Dilthey: Philosopher of the Human Studies. Princeton: 
Princeton UP, 1975. 

Manlove, C. N. The Impulse of Fantasy Literature. Kent, OH: The Kent State UP, 
1983. 

d i Modern Fantasy: Five Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1975. 

Meeker, Joseph. The Comedy of Survival: Studies in Literary Ecology. New York: 
Scribner’s, 1974. 

Millhauser, Steven. From the Realm of Morpheus. New York: Morrow, 1986. 

Mobley, Jane. “Toward a Definition of Fantasy Fiction.” Extrapolation 15 (1973— 


74): 117-28. 


























Works Cited 147 
The National Cyclopedia of American Biography. New York: James T. White, 


1932. 

Nesbit, E[dith]. Harding’s Luck. 1910. London: Benn, 1961. 

. The House of Arden. 1908. London: Dent, 1967. 

. The Story of the Amulet. 1907. New York: Looking Glass Library, n.d. 

Norton, Andre. The Beast Master. New York: Harcourt, 1959. 

. Catseye. New York: Harcourt, 1961. 

———. Judgment on Janus. New York: Harcourt, 1963. 

—. “On Writing Fantasy.” The Book of Andre Norton. New York: DAW, 
1975. Rpt. in Fantasists on Fantasy: A Collection of Critical Reflections. Ed. 
Robert Boyer and Kenneth J. Zahorski. New York: Avon, 1984. 154-61. 

. Year of the Unicorn. New York: Ace, 1965. 

Olsen, Lance. Ellipse of Uncertainty: An Introduction to Postmodern Fantasy. 
Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and Fantasy, No. 26. New York: 
Greenwood, 1987. 

Paxson, Diana. Brisingamen. New York: Berkley, 1984. 

Peirce, Charles Sanders. Collected Papers. Ed. Charles Hartshorne and Paul 
Weiss. 6 vols. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1960. 

Phelps, Ethel Johnston. Tatterbood and Other Tales. Old Westbury: The Feminist 
Press, 1978. 

Prickett, Stephen. Victorian Fantasy. Bloomington: Indiana UP, 1979. 

Propp, Vladimir. Morphology of the Folktale. Trans. Laurence Scott. 2nd ed. 
revised and ed. Louis A. Wagner. Austin: U of Texas P, 1968. 

Rabkin, Eric S. The Fantastic in Literature. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1976. 

Raffel, Burton. “The Lord of the Rings as Literature.” In Tolkien and the Critics. 
Ed. Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Notre Dame: U of Notre Dame P, 
1968. 218—46. 

Roessner, Michaela. Walkabout Woman. New York: Bantam, 1988. 

Rosaldo, Michelle Zimbalist. “Women, Culture, and Society: A Theoretical Over- 
view.” In Women, Culture, and Society. Ed. Michelle Zimbalist Rosaldo and 
Louise Lamphere. Stanford: Stanford UP, 1974. 17-42. 

Schmitz, James. The Witches of Karres. New York: Ace, 1966. 

Scholes, Robert. Fabulation and Metafiction. Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1979. 

. Structuralism in Literature: An Introduction. New Haven: Yale UP, 1974. 

Shinn, Thelma J. Worlds within Women: Myth and Mythmaking in Fantastic 
Literature by Women. Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and 
Fantasy, Number 22. Westport: Greenwood, 1986. 

Shippey, T. A. The Road to Middle-Earth. Boston: Houghton, 1983. 

Siebers, Tobin. The Romantic Fantastic. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1984. 

Singal, Daniel Joseph. “Towards a Definition of American Modernism.” American 
Quarterly 39 (Spring 1987): 7-26. 

Spacks, Patricia Meyer. The Female Imagination. NY: Knopf, 1975. 

Spivack, Charlotte. Merlin’s Daughters: Contemporary Women Writers of Fan- 
tasy. Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and Fantasy, Number 23. 
Westport: Greenwood, 1987. 

Stasheff, Christopher. The Warlock in Spite of Himself. New York: Ace, 1969. 
Stone, Kay. “Things Walt Disney Never Told Us.” In Women and Folklore: Images 
and Genres. Ed. Claire R. Farrer. Prospect Heights: Waveland, 1975. 42-50. 
Suvin, Darko. Metamorphoses of Science Fiction: On the Poetics and History of 

a Literary Genre. New Haven: Yale UP, 1979. 

















148 Works Cited 


Swinfen, Ann. In Defense of Fantasy: A Study of the Genre in English and 
American Literature since 1945. London: Routledge, 1984. 

Tepper, Sheri S. Marianne, the Magus, and the Manticore. New York: Ace, 1985. 

Timmerman, John H. Other Worlds: The Fantasy Genre. Bowling Green: Bowl- 
ing Green U Popular Press, 1983. 

Todorov, Tzvetan. The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre. 
Trans. Richard Howard. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1975. 

. Mikhail Bakhtin: The Dialogical Principle. Trans. Wlad Godzich. Theory 
and History of Literature, Number 13. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1984. 

Tolkien, J. R. R. “Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics.” Proceedings of the 
British Academy XXII. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1937. Rpt. in An Anthology of 
Beowulf Criticism. Ed. Lewis E. Nicholson. South Bend: U of Notre Dame P, 

1963. §I-103. 

. The Lord of the Rings. Revised ed. 3 vols.: The Fellowship of the Ring, 

The Two Towers, and The Return of the King. Boston: Houghton, 1967. 

. “On Fairy-Stories.” In Tree and Leaf. Boston: Houghton, 1965. 3—84. 

Tymn, Marshall B., Kenneth J. Zahorski, and Robert H. Boyer. Fantasy Liter- 
ature: A Core Collection and Reference Guide. New York: Bowker, 1979. 

Updike, John. The Witches of Eastwick. New York: Knopf, 1984. 

van Gennep, Arnold. The Rites of Passage. Trans. Monika B. Vizedom and 
Gabrielle L. Caffee. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1960. 

Waugh, Patricia. Metafiction: The Theory and Practice of Self-Conscious Fiction. 
New York: Methuen, 1984. 

White, Hayden. The Content of the Form: Narrative Discourse and Historical 
Representation. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins UP, 1987. 

White, T. H. The Sword in the Stone. London: Collins, 1938. 

Wilde, Alan. Horizons of Assent: Modernism, Postmodernism, and the Ironic 
Imagination. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins UP, 1981. 

Willard, Nancy. Things Invisible to See. New York: Knopf, 1985. 

Wilson, Edmund. Axel’s Castle: A Study in the Imaginative Literature of 1870—- 
1930. New York: Scribner’s, 1931. 

. “Oo, Those Awful Orcs.” The Nation 14 April 1956: 312-14. Rpt. in 
The Bit between My Teeth: A Literary Chronicle of 1950-1965. New York: 
Farrar, 1965. 326-32. 

Vintle, Justin, and Emma Fisher. The Pied Pipers: Interviews with the Influential 
Creators of Children’s Literature. New York: Paddington, 1974. 

Wolfe, Gary K. Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy: A Glossary and 
Guide to Scholarship. Westport: Greenwood, 1986. 

. The Known and the Unknown: The Iconography of Science Fiction. 
Kent, OH: The Kent State UP, 1979. 

Wolfe, Gene. The Book of the New Sun, consisting of The Shadow of the Torturer 
(New York: Timescape, 1980), The Claw of the Conciliator (New York: Time- 
scape, 1981), The Sword of the Lictor (New York: Timescape, 1981), and The 
Citadel of the Autarch (New York: Timescape, 1983). 

. The Urth of the New Sun. New York: TOR, 1987. 

Woolf, Virginia. Orlando: A Biography. New York: Harcourt, 1928. 

Wrightson, Patricia. The Dark Bright Water. New York: Atheneum, 1979. 

. The Ice Is Coming. New York: Atheneum, 1977. 

Young, David, and Keith Hollaman, eds. Magic Realist Fiction: An Anthology. 
New York: Longman, 1984. 

Zelazny, Roger. Creatures of Light and Darkness. Garden City: Doubleday, 1969. 

_ Lord of Light. Garden City: Doubleday, 1967. 


























Index 


Actant, 73, 75; 77; 79-86 passim, 140 
Actor, 73-77 passim, 79-86 passion, 140 
Alexander, Lloyd, 88 

Althusser, Louis, 20 

Anstey, F. (Thomas Anstey Guthrie), 127 
Anthony, Piers, 1, 110, 114 
Architecture, 37-38, 42-43, 50 
Arnason, Eleanor, 128, 137 

Asimov, Isaac, 13, 107 

Auden, W. H., 18, 23 

Auerbach, Erich, 4 


Bakhtin, Mikhael, viii, xii, 20, 75 

Barfield, Owen, 119 

Barth, John, viii, 36, 39-40; Chimera, 45—- 
46 

Barthes, Roland, 20 

Beagle, Peter, 128, 137 

Beckett, Samuel, 52 

Bleiler, E. F, vii 

Bombal, Maria Luisa, 127 

Booth, Wayne, 20 

Borges, Jorge Luis, vili, 1, 36, 53; “Prerre 
Menard, Author of the Quixote,” 20, 22 

Brackett, Leigh, 120 

Bradbury, Ray, 13 

Bradley, Marion Zimmer, x, 120 

Brecht, Bertolt, 16 

Brooke-Rose, Christine, 12, 23-27 

Brooks, Cleanth, 39 

Brown, Fredric, 112-14 

Brownstein, Rachel M., 92 

Bull, Emma, 128, 137 

Burgess, Thornton W., 45 

Burroughs, Edgar Rice, 111-12, 120; The 
Gods of Mars, 120; A Princess of Mars, 
ILI—I2 

Butler, Octavia E., 123 


Calvino, Italo, vill, 1, 36, 49-50, 53, 54, 
130-31; The Castle of Crossed Desti- 
nies, 20; Cosmicomics, 37, 40 

Campbell, John, 112, 113 

Campbell, Joseph, 87 

Canon, literary, vill, ix—xil, 4, 18-19, 49 

Card, Orson Scott, 137; Seventh Son, 128 

Carpenter, Humphrey, 35 

Carroll, Lewis (Charles Lutwidge Dodg- 





son), 7, 14, 126; Alice in Wonderland, 1, 
$3 2s 455,95 

Cawelti, John, 9 

Chalker, Jack, t10 

Character, viii, xii, §1, §4, 69-86, 133, 
36-37, 140 

Chatman, Seymour, vili, 72 

Clifton, Michael, 7 

Coming-of-age rituals, 87-91, 95, 100, 
102-104 passim 

Cooper, Susan, 89, 133 

Cortazar, Julio, vill, 127 

Cowper, Richard (John Middleton Muny, 
Jr.), 121-23 

Crowley, John, vill, 14, 42-50, 62, 64-65, 
105, 128; Agypt, xi, xiv; Engine Stum- 
mer, 42, 45~46; Little, Big, 37, 42-49, 
61, 64, 137-41 

Culler, Jonathan, ix, x, 20 


de Camp, L. Sprague, and Fletcher Pratt, 
III, 114-18, 125; “The Roaring Trum- 
pet,” 115, 116; “The Mathematics of 
Magic,” 115; “The Castle of Iron,” 115; 
“The Wall of Serpents,” 115; “The Green 
Magician,” 115 

De Chirico, Giorgio, 127 

de la Mare, Walter, 45 

Delany, Samuel R., viii, 105; The Einstein 
Intersection, 118, 121% 

de Lint, Charles, 128 

Det Tredici, David, 50 

de Saussure, Ferdinand. See Saussure, Ferdi- 
nand de 

Desire, literature of, 21-23 

Dickens, Charles, 4, 14, 30, 38, 52 

Dickson, Gordon, 116 

Dilthey, Wilhelm, 27 

Dodgson, Charles Lutwidge. See Carroll, 
Lewis 

Donaldson, Stephen, 71 

Doré, Gustave, 5 

Downing, Andrew Jackson, 43 

Dunsany, Lord (Edward John Morton Drax 
Plunkett), 10 


Eco, Umberto, 49 
Ecological criticism, 32—3 3 


149 


150 


Eddison, E. R., 14, 37 

Elgin, Don D., 32-33 

Elgin, Suzette Haden, x; Ozark trilogy, 
IOI—103, 116—18 

Eliade, Mircea, 90 

Estrangement, 16, 106—107, 127, 137 

Ewing, Mrs. (Juliana Horatia), 14 


Fairy tale structure, 15, 20, 25-26, 54, 59, 
72, 87, 128. See also Propp, Vladimir 
Fantastic mode, 1-5, 7-12 passim, 16-17, 
26, 34, $9, 72, 129 

Feminist criticism, ix—x, 35, 88-104 

Flieger, Verlyn, 119 

Folklore, magical, 8—9, 10, 14, 24, 34, 40, 
42, 44-45) 55-56, 63, 71,79» 82, 87—89 
passim, 92-94, 109, 123-24, 132 

Formula fantasy, viil, ix, xii, 1, 2, 9-11, 17, 
48, 49, §6, 67, 89, 105, 111-18, 120 

Forster, E. M., 52-53, 64, 71 

Frames, narrative, 42, 44, 45, 46, 53, 55> 
65-67 passim 

Freudian criticism, 7, 20, 22-23, 27, 29, 30 

Frye, Northrop, 2-3, 14, 20, §4 

Fuzzy sets, 12-13, 106, 126 


Garcia Marquez, Gabriel, 13, 40, 49, 127 

Garner, Alan, 79-85, 127, 133; Elidor, 81; 
The Moon of Gomrath, 79, 80-81; The 
Owl Service, 11, 79, 81-85; The Weird- 
stone of Brisingamen, 79-80 

venette, Gérard, vill, 20, §4-55 
ennep, Arnold van. See van Gennep, Ar 
nold 
2nres, IX—X, Xli, 2, TO-1§, 20-21, 49, 65, 
105-106, 126—27 

Gerrold, David, 103 

Gogol, Nikolai, 127 

Grahame, Kenneth, 14 

Grant, Patrick, 31 

Graves, Michael, 50 

Gray, Alasdair, 46 

Greimas, A. ]., 73 

Guthrie, Thomas Anstey. See Anstey, F. 


Hamilton, Virginia, ror 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 105 

Hazel, Paul, 11 

Heilbrun, Carolyn G., 91, 94, 96, 104 

Heinlein, Robert E., 13, 106, 107; Glory 
Road, 111 

Helprin, Mark, 48-49 

History, x—xi, §7, 61, 129, 130, 131, 134—- 
35, 139, 141 

Howard, Robert E., 1 

Hume, Kathryn, vil, 3, 14, 55 


Index 


Humor, 111-18, 125, 127 
Huxley, Aldous, 13 
Hypnagogic states, 7-8 


Icons: as signs, 6—7, 8; of science fiction, 
107 

Indigenous fantasy, 129-41 

Ingelow, Jean, 94; Mopsa the Fatry, 94-96, 
99, IOI, 104 

Irony, 38-39, 44, 46 

Irving, Washington, 24 

Irwin, W. R., vii 


Jackson, Rosemary, 20-23, 27, 31 

Jacobs, Joseph, 93 

Jameson, Fredric, 20, 31, 32, 49, 67 

Jaynes, Julian, 77 

Johnson, Mark, 12 

Jones, Diana Wynne, viii, 57-60, 65, 89, 
101; Archer’s Goon, §57—§8, 66—67; Fire 
and Hemlock, 62-64, 66-67; The Spell- 
Coats, 66, 101; The Time of the Ghost, 
75-78 

Jungian criticism, 8, 30-31, 70-71 


Kafka, Franz, 36 

Kant, Immanuel, 116 
Kingsley, Charles, 14 
Koestler, Arthur, 114, 118 
Kress, Nancy, 92 

Kristeva, Julia, 20 
Kurtner, Henry, 120 


Lakoff, George, 12 

Language, 4-5, 6, 7, 22, 23, 28-29, 34) 395 
41, $1, §4, 103, 107, 117, L19, 120, 124, 
138—40 

Laumer, Keith, 116 

Le Guin, Ursula K., vili, ix—x, 13, 14, 15, 
70-72, 89, 96, 10§, 106, 126, 127; City 
of Illusions, 121; The Farthest Shore, 65; 
The Left Hand of Darkness, 106, 121; 
Planet of Exile, 121; Rocannon’s World, 
IIO, 120—21; Tehanu, 92; The Tombs of 
Atuan, 61, 88, 97-98, 99, 100; A Wizard 
of Earthsea, 11, 88, 97 

Lewis, C. S., 7-8, 11, 13, 18, 22-23, 37; 
38, §4; Out of the Silent Planet, 111 

Lincoln, Bruce, 90-91 

Lindholm, Megan, 128, 139; Wizard of the 
Pigeons, 133-37 

Lindsay, David, 14 

Lispector, Clarice, 127 

Lundell, Torborg, 93—94 


MacAvoy, R. A., 89, 137; Tea with the 
Black Dragon, 128 


Index 


McCaffrey, Anne, 106-107, 120 

MacDonald, George, 10, 13, 31; Lilith, 
114; Phantastes, 7, 88 

MacDonald, John D., 56 

McKillip, Patricia A., 86, 89, 105; The Rid- 
dle-Master of Hed, 74-75, 96; Heir of 
Sea and Fire, 99-100 

Magic, as narrative code, 15, 55-56, 58-61 
passim, 65-67 passim, 73, 74, 78-80 
passim, 83, 85, 109, 11§—-17, 120-23, 
131, £33, 136 

Magic realism, 127, 128, 129 

Magritte, René, 5, 127 

Malamud, Bernard, 13 

Manlove, C. N., vii, 12, 15, 16, §§ 

Marquez, Gabriel Garcia. See Garcia Mar- 
quez, Gabriel 

Marxist criticism, 20, 27, 31, 32, 34, 35 

Maybeck, Bernard, 38 

Medievalism, 22, 42, [19—-20, 122, 132- 
33, 137 

Meeker, Joseph, 32 

Megastory. See Megatext 

Megatext, 24, 107~109, 131-35 

Merritt, Abrahm, 120 

Metafiction, viii, ix, xli, 1, 40-48 passin, 
64, 66-67, 135 

Millhauser, Steven, 128 

Mimetic mode, x—xi, 3-5, 8-9, 17, 24, 26, 
34, 52-53, $9, 64, 72, 129-30 

Mobley, Jane, 15 

Modernism, 36—42 passim, 49 

Modes, literary, 2-5 

Moore, C. L., 120 

Morgan, Julia, 38 

Music, 37-38, 39, 50 

Myth, XIV, 2~35559) 28, 39, 34, 41, 49, $9 
61, 64, 71, 78, 82, 85-89 passim, 108, 
109, LIO, IIL, 114, I1§, 119-25, 130— 
31 


Nesbit, E[dith], 14, 127; Harding’s Luck, 
56-57, 61; The House of Arden, 56-57 

Norton, Andre, 105; The Beast Master, 
120; Catseye, 120; Judgment on Janus, 
120; Year of the Unicorn, 97 


Olsen, Lance, 36 
Overdetermination, 24, 2§, 27, 132 


Paxson, Diana, 128, 137 
Peake, Mervyn, 14 

Peirce, Charles Sanders, 6 
Phelps, Ethel Johnston, 94 
Pictorial fantasy, 5-6, 127 
Plot, 52, §9, 115-16 

Poe, Edgar Allan, 105 


151 


Postmodernism, viii, xi-xii, 20, 36-37, 
40-42, 45, 46, 48, 49, 50, §2, 127, 128 

Pratt, Fletcher. See de Camp, L. Sprague 

Prickett, Stephen, vii, 12 

Propp, Vladimir, 20, 25, 54, 71, 87 

Proust, Marcel, 54, 55 

Pynchon, Thomas, viii, 36 


Rabkin, Eric S., 12 

Raffel, Burton, 19, 34 

Realism. See Mimetic mode 

Rhetoric, narrative, Xill, 23-27 passim, 44, 
78, 91-92, ITT, 119 

Robbe-Grillet, Alain, 36, 52 

Roessner, Michaela, 101 

Romance, x—xi, 2-3 

Rosaldo, Michelle Zimbalist, 100 

Rossetti, Christina, 94 

Ruskin, John, 14, 94 

Russ, Joanna, vii, x, 13 


Sale, Roger, 18 

Sarraute, Nathalie, 52 

Saussure, Ferdinand de, 27, 28, 34 

Schmitz, James, 116 

Scholes, Robert, 54, 73 

Science fantasy, 1x, x, XIll, 42, 49, 105-25 

Science fiction, 13, 24, 45, 46, 48, 67, 103, 
10§—13 passim, 117, 118, 124-25 

Shelley, Mary, 13, 106, 108 

Shinn, Thelma, J., 89 

Shippey, T. A., 28-29, 41 

Shklovsky, Viktor, 16, 20 

Siebers, Tobin, vil 

Singal, Daniel Joseph, 37 

Smith, E. E. “Doc,” 106 

Sollers, Philippe, 52 

Spacks, Patricia Meyer, 92 

Spivack, Charlotte, 89 

Stasheff, Christopher, 116 

Stone, Kay, 93 

Story, Xi-xii, 19, 34, 41, 43, 49-55 passim, 
59, 61, 62-64, 71-73, 77-79, 86, 128, 
130-33, 135, 136, 139-41 

Structuralism, 15-16, 20, 25-27, 34, 40, 
$4, 71-72, 73 

Subversion, literature of, 21-22 

Suvin, Darko, 106, 110 

Swinfen, Ann, Vii 


Tenniel, Sir John, 5 

Tepper, Sheri S., x, 128, 137 

Thompson, Stith, 93 

Time, narrative representation of, viii, xii, 
24, 52, $35 54> 55-65, 68 

Timmerman, John H., 12 

Todorov, Tzvetan, 20, 24, 75 


152 


Tolkien, J.R.R., 4-5, 9-11 passim, 13, 23, 
36, 38-39, 41-42, 44-47 passim, 64, 
66, 67, 70, 119, 132; The Hobbit, 28; 
The Lord of the Rings, xii, 11, 14-17, 
18-22, 25-35, 37, 39, 40-41, 47, 58— 
61, 65, 69, 72-73, 1273 The Silmarillion, 
28 


Tymn, Marshall B., 126 
Updike, John, 127 


van Gennep, Arnold, 89-90 
Vaughan Williams, Ralph, 38-39, 50 
Venturi, Robert, 50 


Waugh, Patricia, 40 

Wells, H. G., 56, 105, 106 

White, Hayden, xi 

White, T. H., 58; The Sword in the Stone, 
88 

Wilde, Alan, 40 


Index 


Willard, Nancy, 11, 137; Things Invisible to 
See, 128 

Wilson, Edmund, 38-39 

Wolfe, Gary K., 12, 16, 107 

Wolfe, Gene, vii, 105, 110, 125; The Book 
of the New Sun, 123-24; The Urth of the 
New Sun, 123-24 

Women’s writing and the fantastic, xii, 87— 
104 

Wonder, 16-17, 128, 130, 141 

Woolf, Virginia, 36, 70-71; Orlando, 97 

Wrightson, Patricia, 96, 97; The Dark 
Bright Water, 98-99, 100; The Ice Is 
Comung, 98 


Yeats, William Butler, 38 


Zelazny, Roger, x, 14, 110, 118, 127; Crea- 
tures of Light and Darkness, 121; Lord 
of Light, 121 

Zimbardo, Rose A., 18 


BRIAN ATTEBERY is Associate Professor of En- 
glish at Idaho State University and the author of 
The Fantasy Tradition in American Literature, one 
of the pioneering works in the field of fantasy 
scholarship. He was Scholar Guest of Honor at the 
1988 meeting of the Mythopoeic Society and in 
1991 was given the Distinguished Scholarship 
Award by the International Association for the Fan- 
tastic in the Arts. 

















