Books in review -- #95 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #95 = Volume 32, Part 1 = March 2005 

 Fantastic But Not Altogether 
 Utopian. 

 Martha Bartter, ed. 
 The Utopian Fantastic: Selected Essays from the Twentieth International 
 Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts. Contributions to the Study of Science Fiction and Fantasy 105. Westport, CT: 
 Greenwood, 2004. 149 pp. $64.95 hc. 

 The conference paper is a quirky creature, its half-life unpredictable. At 
 its best, it is short, pithy, and witty, with easy-to-understand examples that 
 clarify two or three main points. At its worst, it is written hastily, its 
 argument or context hard to grasp, a formless entity designed to get the author 
 a trip to Florida. Editing a collection of conference papers, then, is a 
 challenge. So is editing a collection of papers on utopia, a famously fuzzy 
 topic. The Utopian Fantastic: Selected Essays from the Twentieth 
 International Conference on the Fantastic in the Arts does not fully succeed 
 in meeting these two challenges, but it nevertheless contains many interesting 
 essays worth reading. 

 As Thomas J. Morrissey’s witty and well-written introduction shows, we are 
 living in times when consideration of utopia and dystopia comes naturally, and 
 is essential. Human pride threatens our potential for utopia. Morrissey writes, 
 “While individuals are being disempowered, humans as a species are more powerful 
 and dangerous than at any other moment in history” (9). This gap between the 
 individual and the group underlies most of the discussions of utopia/ dystopia 
 in this volume. As Roger C. Schlobin concludes his essay “Dark Shadows and 
 Bright Lights: Generators and Maintainers of Utopias and Dystopias,” “utopias 
 will always celebrate the power of the individual will, and dystopias will 
 negate it” (15). 

 The strength of the collection of 14 essays (plus the introduction) lies in 
 the range of primary sources discussed. Here we have essays with utopias/ 
 dystopias set in locales from Africa to Mars. The range of sf and fantasy is 
 impressive: high fantasy, cyberpunk, drama, classic sf, among other forms. 
 According to the introduction, the papers were organized into five categories: 
 “(1) the why and where of utopia, (2) the reactions to hegemonic mechanization, 
 (3) the postcolonial Other in utopia, (4) the question of hope, and (5) thinking 
 and doing utopia” (5). The best sections are the first three. 

 Schlobin’s essay and “Mapping Utopia: Spatial and Temporal Sites of Meaning” 
 by John C. Hawley, in the first section, provide a solid background for the 
 topic of utopia. The longest section, on anti-mechanization, is generally 
 strong. Particularly welcome is an examination of utopia in drama, an 
 oft-ignored genre, as Jeanne Beckwith gives us in her lively essay, “David 
 Mamet’s The Water Engine: The Utopian Ideal as Social Control.” Donald E. 
 Morse’s essay, “We Are Marching to Utopia: Kurt Vonnegut’s Player Piano ,” 
 is a clear and interesting take on the problems created when machines become the 
 be-all-and-end-all. Vonnegut’s question “What are people for?” (29) is at the 
 root of all the essays dealing with mechanization. Carl Swidorski carefully 
 examines the socialist roots of Kim Stanley Robinson’s Mars Trilogy: the utopian 
 vision of Mars reflects that of socialist movements and historical materialism 
 on Earth. Dennis M. Weiss’s essay on William Gibson’s cyberpunk universe 
 explores the rootlessness of modern life and Gibson’s ambivalence about 
 technology’s role in utopia. In the third section, looking at utopia and home 
 from a postcolonialist perspective is fruitful in Lynn F. Williams and Martha 
 Bartter’s “You Can’t Go Home Again: Kirinyaga by Mike Resnick.” They 
 demonstrate a conundrum of utopia: “if it is perfect, it should not change, yet 
 without change it becomes rigid, uncreative, and ultimately dystopian” (97).

 The collection suffers from a lack of utopian scholarship. Although the first 
 three essays do provide a solid utopian grounding, most of the essays do not 
 follow their example. There is a wealth of utopian thought out there: the 
 Society for Utopian Studies has its own journal, and utopian thinkers abound. 
 Most of the essays, however, do not refer to any works about utopia at all, or 
 mention them only briefly. Grounding their perceptive comments about specific 
 works in the general theory of thinkers such as Ernst Bloch, Ruth Levitas, and 
 Lyman Tower Sargent would have given writers more authority and depth in their 
 discussions. The collection missed an opportunity to bring together two separate 
 schools of scholarship: sf/fantasy and utopia. Cross-fertilization would have 
 made the essays richer. 

 Many of the writers in this volume do not even define utopia for their own 
 purposes, and as there are various ways of defining utopia/dystopia, they can be 
 misunderstood. It should not be up to the reader to try to figure out what makes 
 an essay part of the utopian discourse. Two essays avoid the discourse 
 altogether: “Women and Mad Science: Women as Witnesses to the Scientific 
 Re-creation of Humanity” by Cherilyn Lacy is a terrific essay that ties 
 Frankenstein to The X-Files in a fascinating way, but it does not 
 seem to belong in a utopian collection; “News from Somewhere: A Case for 
 Romance-Tradition Fantasy’s Reformist Poetic” by Kelly Searsmith likewise is 
 interesting, but deals with fantasy and subversion, not with utopia. 

 Sharper editing would have strengthened and unified the collection. Authors 
 should have been encouraged (although that can be difficult) to attend more to 
 utopian/dystopian criticism and to polish their work. The essays could have been 
 more effectively arranged: the last two groupings, the “question of hope” and 
 “thinking and doing utopia” sections, are vague. The two essays on Sheri S. 
 Tepper’s fiction seem to go together naturally as feminist papers, but they are 
 separated. On a micro level, the editor should have cleared up messy contexts, 
 underdeveloped one-or-two-sentence paragraphs, and missing quotation marks. 
 Seeing the apostrophe used to make a plural, as in “human’s,” is a dystopian 
 sight. 

 In all, The Utopian Fantastic is weighted more toward the fantastic 
 than the utopian, but reading it will provoke thought, the utopian aim of all 
 scholars. 

 —Elaine Ostry, SUNY-Plattsburgh 

 Shouting Loudest. 

 Wheeler Winston Dixon. 
 Visions of the Apocalypse: Spectacles of Destruction in 
 American Cinema. London: Wallflower Press, 2003. xiii + 169 pp. 
 12.99 pbk. 

 The opening sentence of Visions of the Apocalypse makes evident the 
 themes and tone of what is to follow: “This is a book about the end of cinema, 
 the end of the world, and the end of civilization as we know it” (1). Throughout 
 the book’s introduction, three chapters, and conclusion (entitled “Coda”), Dixon 
 makes similar statements of epoch-defining significance. These are usually 
 directed at the commercial machinations of the culture industry: “Only death can 
 presage resurrection. Only death ensures immortality. Only death permits endless 
 repackaging” (5). These are Dixon’s rhetorical tools as he attempts to situate 
 contemporary Hollywood filmmaking in the context of America’s post-9/11 
 political climate, and to think through this current moment of cultural crisis 
 in relation to earlier cinematic representations of the apocalypse. Visions 
 of the Apocalypse is as scornful of the rapacious will-to-profit exemplified 
 by twenty-first-century multimedia conglomerates as it is of the deceptions 
 practiced by America’s political leaders, and it understands the two as 
 interpenetrating each other. 

 In Chapter One, “Freedom from Choice,” Dixon surveys the restrictive economic 
 matrix in which cinematic production and distribution is caught, and laments the 
 difficulty of finding any but the most obvious (and obviously profitable) 
 cinematic product. 

 Chapter Two, “Invasion USA,” considers the patriotism and self-justification 
 of American militarism shown by Hollywood cinema in the wake of 11 September 
 2001 in films such as Black Hawk Down (2001) and We Were Soldiers 
 (2002). A series of parallels is established between the last three years of 
 American cinema and its historical precedents, particularly Hollywood after 
 Pearl Harbor, and film production in the era of McCarthyism. Dixon also muses 
 upon the films and computer games whose destruction of New York assumes 
 portentous significance in light of 9/11, and the cultural products that 
 scrambled to make use of the attack upon the World Trade Center. Dixon ranges 
 across Al-Jazeera reportage, Internet rumors, Chinese DVD pirates, music 
 companies, and film production as he traces the warning signs of a permanent War 
 on Terrorism in which Hollywood cinema is pressed into the service of America’s 
 culture of surveillance. 

 The third chapter begins with another breathless statement: “Time is running 
 out. I can feel it” (97). Initially, Dixon seems most concerned about time 
 “running out” for what was once called “high art”; he laments the incursion of 
 Disney into Broadway and the intrusion of Oprah’s Book Club into the ecology of 
 publishing. He then mourns the commercialization of the French film industry, 
 although Visions of the Apocalypse celebrates the remaining practitioners 
 who continue to work against the grain of the “mainstream cinema marketplace” 
 (107). Dixon contrasts the low-budget filmmaking of 1940s and 1950s Hollywood to 
 the meager opportunities available to independent productions in the 
 twenty-first century. Producers such as Robert L. Lippert and Val Lewton, by 
 accepting “strict budget and scheduling requirements” (123), were permitted a 
 great deal of autonomy by their studios, whereas “commercially marginal” (122) 
 films are now held in contempt by executives. Dixon draws similarities between 
 the dominant tendencies of contemporary cinema and video games: both share an 
 “absence of characterization” and a “reliance on violence and weaponry at the 
 expense of any human element” (124). Dixon indicts “the social landscape of 
 contemporary America” (129), with its culture of guns and death, for fostering 
 the violence it simulates on computer and cinema screens. 

 Although Chapter Three condemns President George W. Bush’s “policy of 
 perpetual alarmism” (129), the book’s “Coda” reproduces the anxiety of the 
 national security state: “Every nation that wants nuclear capability can 
 purchase it, either through legitimate channels or on the black market.... [E]veryone 
 is at risk” (131). Dixon jumps from theme to theme in a disjointed finale. Was 
 the Nazi scientist Werner Heisenberg deliberately sabotaging his own research 
 into the German atomic bomb? Was the original Woodstock music festival really 
 the symbolic core of 1960s freedom and liberation? Dixon seems to suggest 
 otherwise, and argues that the cinema and its audiences have always been in 
 thrall to total destruction: “we have always been playing with disaster” (132).
 Visions of the Apocalypse cites innumerable productions from around the 
 world and since the 1930s to show there are few “genocidal dreams” that the 
 technology of cinema is not willing to put on screen. The book ends by offering 
 the specter of fear as a motivating force behind the implicit contract between 
 cinema and audiences, “trying to visualize our perfect death” (143). The 
 rhetorical question “What are we afraid of?” is posed: “The answer is simple. 
 When we dream of the certainty and inevitability of the apocalypse, we are 
 afraid of life itself” (143). 

 Shining through Visions of the Apocalypse is Dixon’s profound 
 appreciation of the capabilities of cinema, seen most memorably in a brief 
 discussion of the performance of Christopher Lee’s eyes. The book’s intellectual 
 journey is stunning in its sweep of texts and media, but this is also one of its 
 failings. The breadth of research creates many argumentative detours; these do 
 not always lead convincingly back to the book’s thesis, nor are they always 
 sufficiently woven into the fabric of the study as a whole. It is difficult to 
 envisage which readers will be surprised by Dixon’s “revelations,” as it is 
 hardly novel to draw attention to the seriousness of the international situation 
 or the apocalyptic banality of contemporary Hollywood filmmaking. “Think the 
 magazine in your hands is the product of an independent vision?”(34). Who does? 
 Readers are unlikely to be so naïve that Dixon’s “Guess again” is necessary 
 (34). 

 Dixon’s achievement is in assembling and wielding many diverse sources, and in 
 showing the institutional apparatus that has led the cinema to repeat so often 
 its devastated vistas. The attempts at understanding Hollywood’s visions of the 
 apocalypse psychologically, sociologically, or philosophically are not pursued 
 with enough rigor or critical insight to be of equal interest. Unfortunately, 
 Visions of the Apocalypse is prone to the tendency it decries in Hollywood 
 filmmaking, the deployment of the spectacular at the expense of the substantial. 
 The book’s grand statements regularly obscure any nuances, the presence of which 
 might have alleviated its overbearing apocalyptic tone. The polemical voice of
 Visions of the Apocalypse is unsuited to moments of subtlety, especially 
 when considering something as complex as the consumers of entertainment 
 conglomerates: “an increasingly bored and restless public, unsure of where their 
 next meal is coming from, unable to escape the cycle of grinding poverty that 
 supports these media giants” (15). As part of his interrogation of the 
 commercial impetus dominating filmmaking, Dixon quotes the president of 
 marketing at Universal Pictures, for whom the biggest challenge of promoting 
 films is “being able to shout loud enough” (32). Dixon seems to conduct his 
 critique of the industry by attempting to shout louder still. 

 —Paul Williams, University of Exeter 

 The Unique Voice of Brazilian 
 Science Fiction. 

 Elizabeth M. Ginway. 
 Brazilian Science Fiction: Cultural Myths and Nationhood 
 in the Land of the Future. Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell UP, 2004. 288 
 pp. $50.00 hc. 

 The author, an associate professor of Portuguese and Brazilian literature at 
 the University of Florida, gives us a historico-cultural-sociological 
 interpretation of the development of science fiction in Brazil between 1960 and 
 2001. The author’s central premise is that the forms and emphases that Brazilian 
 science fiction has taken are colored by the nation’s own history—both older and 
 recent—and its relationships with “first world” countries. 

 One central problem for the author is the scarcity of primary texts. In the 
 first place, since publication runs in Brazil are limited due to the relatively 
 small reading public, it is difficult to find many texts and very few of them 
 have been translated. In the second place, a taste for science fiction has been 
 limited to only a portion of the already small audience. Some of the early texts 
 were even circulated primarily in mimeographed copies. Therefore, the author 
 gives fairly extensive summaries of the stories and novels—mostly the 
 former—which she uses for analysis. Thus, she makes these works more accessible 
 to an English-speaking audience, and also to those Brazilians who know English 
 but have not encountered these texts. 

 Ginway uses certain Brazilian national myths as a point of departure: Brazil 
 as a tropical paradise, Brazil as a racially blind democracy, Brazilians as a 
 sensual and docile people, and Brazil as a country with a perennial potential 
 for national greatness. While there is a kernel of truth in all myths, it is a 
 flawed truth in all these cases. The country is not a fertile paradise; it has 
 its own brand of racial prejudice along with enormous differences in 
 socioeconomic levels; the images of sensuality and docility are aimed at least 
 in part at the tourist market; and the country has been referred to as the “land 
 of the future” for more than a century. One might recall the speculative, 
 tongue-in-cheek name for the country invented by Brazilian economist Edmar Bacha 
 in 1974: “Belíndia.” This very graphic term reflects the fact that a relatively 
 small proportion of the country has a standard of living equivalent to that of 
 Belgium, while other much larger parts are more like impoverished areas of 
 India. 

 The author divides the development of recent Brazilian science fiction into 
 three phases. The first of these emerged in the 1960s, highly influenced by 
 Anglo-American science fiction but already putting its own national spin on 
 classic themes such as space travel, aliens, and robots. Brazil was often 
 portrayed symbolically as submissive and stereotypically feminine, relatively 
 helpless in the face of the technological superiority of other countries or of 
 aliens. The second phase corresponded more or less with the 1970s, and featured 
 a strong dystopian and anti-technological element in reaction to the rapid 
 industrialization pushed by the 1964-85 military government. As a result, 
 ecological themes also became more prominent. The third is a present-day, 
 post-dictatorship phase, a more complex period which, in addition to the classic 
 themes, features a more tolerant attitude toward technology but still concerns 
 itself with Brazil’s reaction to foreign influences and globalization. There is 
 more hard science fiction, the appearance of Brazil-oriented alternate history, 
 a blurring of traditional gender roles, and the country’s own version of 
 cyperpunk (which has been dubbed “tupinipunk”—a play on the name of the 
 tupiniquim indigenous group). Most of the book is comprised of the analysis of 
 these three periods, with extensive discussion of how science fiction in Brazil 
 has developed in a way different from that of other countries, notably the 
 United States, reflecting uniquely Brazilian emphases and attitudes. 

 In the author’s synopses of the Brazilian novels and short stories, the many 
 brief quotations from the works and their titles are unfailingly given in both 
 Portuguese and English. It is particularly gratifying to see the care which has 
 been taken to reproduce the Portuguese texts accurately, including the 
 diacritical system which will not be familiar to many readers. In other studies 
 it is not uncommon to see less attention paid to the accuracy of the texts’ 
 original language. In a few cases one might quibble slightly with the 
 translations of individual words: funcionário (106) might be better rendered as 
 “bureaucrat” than “functionary”; Secretária (110) as “Ministry,” “Department,” 
 or even “Secretariat” than “Secretary.” 

 Ginway has produced a very readable, accessible, and thorough synthesis of 
 Brazilian science fiction in the 40-year period from 1960 to 2001, a period of 
 increasing sophistication and development of its own uniquely Brazilian voice. 
 She states clearly that she does not necessarily see her book as a history of 
 recent science fiction in Brazil, but it is not difficult to read her study in 
 that particular way. She shows how the genre has diverged from the 
 Anglo-American model which was its initial inspiration, and has taken some new 
 paths based on the Brazilian world-view. Readers familiar or not with the 
 country’s socio-cultural milieu can also learn a great deal about recent trends 
 in Brazilian society and better understand this very complex nation. This sort 
 of analysis might well be used as a model for studying the science fiction 
 produced by other developing countries. 

 —Jim Rambo, DePauw University 

 Rich in Information, Poor in 
 Order 

 Timothy Morton, ed. 
 A Routledge Literary Sourcebook on Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein. New York: Routledge, 2002. 216 pp. $25.95 pbk. 

 The introduction to A Routledge Literary Sourcebook on Mary Shelley’s 
 Frankenstein lays out a clearly defined mission statement from the very 
 start: “This book is designed to help the undergraduate student and advanced 
 high-school student find their way around the text of Shelley’s great novel, its 
 historical and cultural context, and criticism on it” (1) as well as “to give a 
 completely digested, or at least a strongly oriented, view” of Shelley’s text 
 (3). The editor, Timothy Morton (who has also edited Shelley and the 
 Revolution of Taste [Cambridge UP 1995] and Radical Food [Routledge 
 2000]), declares his hope that, “if this is the first time you have looked into
 Frankenstein , you will find this a helpful and easy volume to use as a 
 reference tool alongside a proper complete text” (1), classifying the book in no 
 uncertain terms as a means for new readers to gain access to social, cultural, 
 interpretive, and critical discourses through a broad spectrum of textual 
 offerings. Through a detailed compilation of explanatory narratives, essays, 
 letters and other contemporary documents, reviews, photographs, excerpts from 
 critical texts, abstracts, and bibliographies all pertaining to Mary Shelley’s 
 influential novel, Morton covers well the scholarship surrounding 
 Frankenstein from its conception to the present day. Insofar as its content 
 is concerned, the book has achieved its goal, though the structure and 
 methodology of the text at times confuse rather than enlighten the prospective 
 reader. 

 The rather overwhelming wealth of information in the book is loosely 
 organized into four parts, and each part is further divided into separate 
 sections. Part One, entitled “Contexts,” includes an overview, a chronology, and 
 a series of contemporary documents; it attempts to situate Shelley’s novel in 
 terms of historical and cultural boundaries; Part Two, “Interpretations,” deals 
 with the performance history and critical history of the text; Part Three, “Key 
 Passages,” provides a chapter-by-chapter summary of the novel, as well as a 
 limited discussion of pertinent issues and questions; and Part Four, “Further 
 Reading,” is a thematically partitioned bibliography. While there is a great 
 deal of interesting and useful information in each of the four parts, a further 
 division into chapters might have avoided leaving the reader feeling inundated 
 with data and documentation. The organizational structure at times is also 
 confusing; for example, it is unclear why the editor chose to put “Early 
 Receptions of Frankenstein ” (37), “Performing Frankenstein ” (43), 
 and “Modern Criticism” (80) together in the “Interpretations” section of the 
 book. The separate parts lack a logical cohesion or guiding narrative voice that 
 might help a young, inexperienced reader keep his or her feet in this tidal wave 
 of information and documentation. 

 Likewise, a more analytic approach to the “Key Passages” section might have 
 served to ground new readers more thoroughly in Shelley’s novel, and despite the 
 editor’s claim that he has “interspersed guiding notes within the extracts in 
 order to make their navigation somewhat easier” (127), often the “guiding notes” 
 are no more than scraps of plot summary bridging the gaps between excerpts of 
 the novel. Here the editor seems invested in a descriptive approach to the novel 
 rather than addressing the question of why we should consider these passages 
 “key.” At times, however, the notes are genuinely useful, directing the reader 
 to a specific article or excerpt elsewhere in the book and drawing attention to 
 individual conceits throughout Shelley’s novel. This imbalance of description 
 vs. analysis appears in the “Performing Frankenstein ” section as well. On 
 the surface, this part of the text is a very useful and exhaustively researched 
 series of lists charting the performance history of the novel, including (but 
 not limited to) its adaptations in theater, film, television, and music. Only 
 some of the items in these lists are annotated, however; others are merely 
 offered as a bibliographic record, and I would have preferred a more consistent 
 and even-handed application of method throughout the section. 

 In terms of style, the editorial voice of this book often lapses from clear 
 and concise into simplistic and overly self-conscious language. Granted, the 
 intended audience is high-school and college students, but the text as a whole 
 suffers from the “show, don’t tell” syndrome. All too often the editor announces 
 his plan before he executes it—“I have chosen” (2, 37, 127), “I have included” 
 (3), “I have submitted” (80), “I have interspersed” (127), etc.; and the effect 
 is to draw the reader’s attention away from the subject at hand and aim it 
 towards the text’s more problematic structure and organization. Perhaps an 
 explanation of the editor’s overarching methodology would have been more 
 appropriate than fragmentary statements of intent interspersed throughout the 
 text. 

 This is not to say, however, that A Routledge Literary Sourcebook on Mary 
 Shelley’s Frankenstein can’t be an effective resource tool. While 
 simply thumbing through the text may result in frustration and confusion, it has 
 an excellent index, which I think is the most useful portion of the book. My 
 interest was piqued, for example, when I came across an item entitled, “Goon 
 [yes, that’s goon as in g-o-o-n] with the Wind” (196), or the entry directing me 
 to page 48 labeled “Mr. Potato Head commercials” (198). Curious as to how these 
 oddities related to Mary Shelley’s novel, I was actually moved to investigate 
 them. There are other touches that serve to make the book more reader friendly 
 as well; a series of black-and-white photographs and illustrations from movies, 
 performances, and other pop culture venues liven up the “Performing 
 Frankenstein ” section, and there is a very good table of these illustrations 
 on page xi. The editors have cleverly used blocks of grey text throughout the 
 book to separate the editorial voice from documents by other authors, and tools 
 such as the Table of Contents, the Chronology, and the Directory of Figures make 
 negotiating the information in the text much easier. 

 So would I recommend this book as a pedagogical tool to high-school or 
 undergraduate students who are reading Frankenstein for the first time? 
 Overall, I would have to say I would not. As a university English instructor who 
 teaches Frankenstein to undergraduates, however, I might be moved to use 
 A Routledge Literary Sourcebook on Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein as 
 a teaching tool myself, as a guide to documents and sources, articles and trends 
 in critical theory. This is not a book to read from start to finish; rather, it 
 could be useful as a guide or, as Morton himself describes it, as a “kind of 
 hub, or bay, that will connect [students] with other books in the library or 
 articles in the periodicals room” (3). While this book could overwhelm a 
 student, it might well be helpful for any teacher interested in showing how 
 Frankenstein was influenced by—and has influenced in its turn—nearly two 
 centuries of Western literature. 

 —Sharon Emmerichs, University of 
 Missouri-Columbia 

 Back to Home
