#606 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: We are not in 'fairy-land', but in real river-lands in autumn
  NOTE: Letter 210 (PDF p.292) verbatim; the 'Old scamp!' limb is verbatim too: 'This is a good example of the general tendency that I find in Z to reduce and lower the tone towards that of a more childish fairy-tale.' Both limbs supported.
#607 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: Both modes are alien to my story
  NOTE: Letter 210 verbatim: lembas 'called a "food concentrate"'; 'I dislike strongly any pulling of my tale towards the style and feature of "contes des fees", or French fairy-stories. I dislike equally any pull towards "scientification", of which this expression is an example. Both modes are alien to my story.' The book prints 'contes des fees' (claim's header spells it 'contes de fees'); no substantive divergence.
#608 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: represented as I have presented them: in style and sentiment
  NOTE: Letter 210 verbatim, including the second limb: 'I should resent perversion of the characters ... even more than the spoiling of the plot and scenery.' Both limbs supported.
#609 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: thereby flattening the tale out
  NOTE: Letter 210 verbatim; assimilation limb verbatim as 'the flattening effect that assimilation of one incident to another must have'; the preference limb as 'A scene of gloom lit by a small red fire ... would seem to me far more impressive than yet one more scene of screams and rather meaningless slashings'. 'Silence' is supported in the same item: 'The Black Riders do not scream, but keep a more terrifying silence.'
#610 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: totally different in tone and scenery
  NOTE: Letter 210 (PDF pp.293-294) verbatim: 'Prime Action, the Ringbearers ... Subsidiary Action ... leading to the "heroic" matter. It is essential that these two branches should each be treated in coherent sequence ... because they are totally different in tone and scenery. Jumbling them together entirely destroys these things.' All limbs supported.
#611 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: a dwelling of Men in an 'heroic age'
  NOTE: Letter 210 (PDF p.294) verbatim: 'In such a time private "chambers" played no part ... He received guests or emissaries, seated on the dais in his royal hall.' The passage is about Theoden/Edoras, i.e. Rohan ('the "heroic" Rohirrim'). The 'fit the world described' limb is verbatim in the same letter at item 8: 'If details are to be added ... they should at least fit the world described.'
#613 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: create a world for languages that agreed with his personal aesthetic
  NOTE: Live tolkiengateway.net returns a Cloudflare 403; verdict formed on the raw Wayback capture https://web.archive.org/web/20260301094505id_/https://tolkiengateway.net/wiki/Letter_205. Page (Letter 205, to Christopher Tolkien, 21 Feb 1958): 'Nobody believed him, said Tolkien, when he stated that his long book was an attempt to create a world for languages that agreed with his personal aesthetic, yet it was true. An enquirer ... had been told that Tolkien wanted to create a situation in which Elen sila lumenn' omentielvo would be a common greeting.' Quote verbatim; the 'Elvish greeting would be ordinary' limb is the page's Quenya greeting = 'a common greeting'.
#614 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: To go there is to destroy the magic, unless new unattainable vistas are again revealed
  NOTE: Raw PDF fetched (1.88 MB, 493 pp) and text-extracted; letter 247 'To Colonel Worskett', 20 September 1963, PDF p. 351. 'Part of the attraction of The L.R. is, I think, due to the glimpses of a large history in the background: an attraction like that of viewing far off an unvisited island, or seeing the towers of a distant city gleaming in a sunlit mist. To go there is to destroy the magic, unless new unattainable vistas are again revealed.' Quote verbatim (the extractor injects stray intra-word spaces, e.g. 'una ttainable'; whitespace-insensitive match confirmed). Every limb supported, including the recipient and date.
#615 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: a language requires a suitable habitation, and a history in which it can develop
  NOTE: Same raw PDF; letter 294 'To Charlotte and Denis Plimmer', 8 February 1967, PDF p. 405. Tolkien's proposed rewording: 'The imaginary histories grew out of Tolkien's predilection for inventing languages. He discovered, as others have who carry out such inventions to any degree of completion, that a language requires a suitable habitation, and a history in which it can develop.' Quote verbatim; the 'origin of the imaginary histories' limb is the first sentence of that same passage.
#616 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: has achieved a verisimilitude, which assists probably in the 'literary belief in the story as historical
  NOTE: Same raw PDF; letter 297, 'Drafts for a letter to Mr Rang', dated Aug. 1967, PDF p. 411. 'this construction, the product of very considerable thought and labour, has achieved (as I hoped) a verisimilitude, which assists probably in the ‘literary belief in the story as historical.' The pre-existing-languages and name-meaning limbs are the same letter: 'the bulk of the nomenclature is constructed from these pre-existing languages, and where the resulting names have analysable meanings (as is usual) these are relevant solely to the fiction with which they are integrated.'
#617 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: 'Anglo-Saxon' ... as a device of 'translation' ... the sole field ... entirely delusory
  NOTE: Same raw PDF, letter 297, PDF pp. 411-412: 'The reason for using ‘Anglo-Saxon’ in the nomenclature and occasional glimpses of the language of the Eorlingas – as a device of ‘translation’ – is given in Appendix F. From which it follows that ‘Anglo-Saxon’ is not only a ‘fertile field’, but the sole field in which to look for the origin and meaning of words or names belonging to the speech of the Mark ... Outside this restricted field reference to A-S is entirely delusory.' Quote verbatim; every limb supported.
#618 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: Tolkien's most important demand was that the word hobbit stayed unaltered
  NOTE: Live host Cloudflare-blocked; raw Wayback capture https://web.archive.org/web/20250818153124id_/https://tolkiengateway.net/wiki/Letter_190 used. Page (Letter 190 to Rayner Unwin, 3 July 1956, on Schuchart's Dutch translation): 'he objected to translations of personal nomenclature; the Shire was based on (or, as he called it himself, "a parody of") rural England; plus, the toponymy of the Shire was wholly different from that of the Netherlands' and 'Tolkien's most important demand was that the word hobbit stayed unaltered; no more "Hompen".' All four limbs supported.
#619 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: not 'meaningless', but are English in form ... obsolete or dialectal, or are worn-down and obscured
  NOTE: Raw PDF fetched from tolkien.ro (332 KB, 23 pp) and text-extracted; Guide to the Names, p. 1: 'Names (of places and persons) occur, especially in the Shire, which are not ‘meaningless’, but are English in form (that is, in theory the author’s translation of Common Speech names), containing elements that are in the current language obsolete or dialectal, or are worn-down and obscured in form. (See Appendix F.)' Quote verbatim; every limb supported.
#620 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: both a translation and also (to English ears) a euphonious name of familiar English style
  NOTE: Same raw PDF, Guide to the Names p. 1: 'the author, acting as translator of Elvish names already devised ... has taken pains to produce a Common Speech name that is both a translation and also (to English ears) a euphonious name of familiar English style, even if it does not actually occur in England. Rivendell is a successful example, as a translation of Grey-elven Imladris ‘Glen of the Cleft’.' Quote verbatim; the Rivendell/Imladris limb is explicit.
#621 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: introduce an unexplained element without a place in the feigned linguistic history of the period
  NOTE: Same raw PDF, Guide to the Names p. 1: 'to leave them unchanged would disturb the carefully devised scheme of nomenclature and introduce an unexplained element without a place in the feigned linguistic history of the period.' Quote verbatim; the 'single designed scheme' limb is the page's 'the carefully devised scheme of nomenclature'.
#624 [VERIFIED_SUBSTANCE] TW: the apparently casual and incomplete mentions of this background
  NOTE: Raw wikitext fetched via Special:Export. All four limbs are supported: the article's numbered list of 'four factors that help to build the impression of depth' is (1) 'the enormous scale and detail of Tolkien's Middle-earth background', (2) 'the apparently casual and incomplete mentions of this background in the text', (3) 'the multiple accounts, containing gaps and inconsistencies, as if it were a real body of historical documents' (section heading 'Multiple accounts, apparent contradictions', explained via the Prologue's Red Book of Westmarch redactions), (4) 'the multiple styles in which the various texts are written, as if by different hands.' Not VERBATIM only because the supplied quotation 'casual, incomplete mentions' is not word for word: the page reads 'casual and incomplete mentions'.
#625 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: place him not as author but as the last of a line of philological editors of ancient documents
  NOTE: Raw wikitext fetched via Special:Export. 'Several of these contribute to his frame stories, which place him not as author but as the last of a line of philological editors of ancient documents originally written by characters such as the Hobbits Bilbo and Frodo Baggins.' Quote verbatim (the wikilink markup wraps 'philological editors' but the rendered string is continuous). Paratext limb: 'Tolkien included a mass of paratexts – prefaces, notes, and appendices of all kinds'; many-hands limb: the text 'had in that long period been annotated and edited by many hands'. 'of the Red Book' is the article's Bilbo/Frodo manuscript, named Red Book of Westmarch elsewhere in the same article.
#626 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: rather try to wring the juice out of a single sentence, or explore the implications of one word
  NOTE: Raw HTML fetched from tolkienestate.com and tag-stripped locally (no summarizer). Shippey: 'In the last text of the volume, his ‘Valedictory Address to the University of Oxford’, delivered in 1959 when he retired, Tolkien expresses his faith in literature, and gives a few clues about his method: ‘I would always rather try to wring the juice out of a single sentence, or explore the implications of one word than try to sum up a period in a lecture, or pot a poet in a paragraph’.' Quote verbatim; 'than survey' = the page's 'sum up a period in a lecture, or pot a poet in a paragraph'; 'the method' is the page's own framing ('gives a few clues about his method').
#627 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: taking pains to singularize the speech of most of his important characters: social and cultural differences
  NOTE: Raw HTML fetched from tolkienestate.com and tag-stripped locally. Ferre/Lauzon/Riggs: 'but also as a stylist, by taking pains to singularize the speech of most of his important characters: social and cultural differences are conspicuously present in the English text, from Gandalf to the Gaffer, Gollum to Theoden.' And: '‘Why deliberately ignore, refuse to use the wealth of English which leaves us a choice of styles – without any possibility of unintelligibility,’ the author wondered when a reader criticized his narrative style.' Quotation verbatim; both limbs supported (page spells it 'singularize').
#628 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: To give your language an individual flavour
  NOTE: Raw HTML fetched from tolkienestate.com. Page quotes Tolkien: “To give your language an individual flavour, it must have woven into it the threads of an individual mythology. … The converse indeed is true, your language construction will breed a mythology”. The cited quote string appears word for word; claim drops only the possessive ‘your’.
#630 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: far more deliberate stylistic variation than any other novel provides
  NOTE: Raw HTML fetched. Both limbs on the page: ‘…if with far more deliberate stylistic variation than any other novel provides’ and ‘contains some sixty poems and songs, in many styles and several languages’. Only precision loss: the page hedges ‘some sixty’, the claim states ‘sixty’.
#633 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: one wonders what book Moorcock read
  NOTE: Raw HTML fetched. Bratman verbatim: ‘one wonders what book Moorcock read, because it’s certainly not The Lord of the Rings.’ plus ‘the fragments Moorcock quotes are “entirely out of context”’ (= out of context). Williams: ‘Moorcock has simply sneered at Tolkien without knowing what he is talking about’ (= uninformed). ‘of the prose’ is supported obliquely — the article frames Moorcock’s grounds as ‘the poverty of their writing style’ — though the word ‘prose’ appears in the article only in a navbox.
#636 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: 85% of all “non-direct” speech … represents hobbits
  NOTE: Landing page carries only an abstract; the PDF is 403 on live scholar.valpo.edu even with a browser UA, referer and cookie jar (routes 1 and 3 failed). Recovered via Wayback raw capture 20221016142859id_ of the viewcontent.cgi PDF (route 2) and extracted with pypdf. Holmes writes: ‘Chapter 4 (“Points of View,” Kullmann) … measuring the dominance of the hobbit point of view in the novel by making them the internal storytellers (85% of all “non-direct” speech, according to Kullmann, represents hobbits), and the foci of “psychonarration (p. 105).’ Every limb verbatim; the only deviations are PDF-extraction spacing artifacts (‘85% o f all’, ‘non -direct’).
#638 [VERIFIED_SUBSTANCE] TW: dialogue typically makes up around a quarter of the text
  NOTE: Raw HTML fetched; no quote field supplied, so graded on substance. Page: ‘About half of The Lord of the Rings consists of dialogue, poetry and song, or stories told by a character. Thomas Kullmann and Dirk Siepmann … contrast it to the modern novel, where dialogue typically makes up around a quarter of the text.’ Every limb supported; ‘roughly 25%’ is the claim’s rendering of ‘around a quarter’.
#639 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: using direct speech to comprise 50 percent of the text
  NOTE: Landing page is abstract-only and the live PDF is 403; recovered via Wayback raw capture 20230512052131id_ of dc.swosu.edu viewcontent.cgi (route 2), extracted with pypdf. Bolding, Mythlore 41.1 p. 281: ‘Next, Thomas Kullmann takes over … the trilogy follows the standard patterns, using direct speech to comprise 50 percent of the text (90). Narrative oversight comes from the point of view of the hobbits and their experiences while even maintaining the third-person voice.’ Quote verbatim; the (90) citation and every limb check out.
#640 [VERIFIED_SUBSTANCE] TW: higher proportion than is usual in nineteenth- or twentieth-century novels
  NOTE: euppublishing.com returns a Cloudflare JS challenge on the live URL (route 1 failed); recovered via Wayback raw capture 20220615121435id_ (route 2). Byline confirms Allan Turner, Journal of Inklings Studies vol. 12 iss. 1, pp. 139–142, 2022. Page: ‘The next three chapters are devoted to direct speech, of which, as Kullmann points out, there is a higher proportion than is usual in either nineteenth- or twentieth-century novels, since it serves more purposes than straightforward social conversation, and indeed it mostly evokes pre-texts from an older period.’ No quote field was supplied, hence SUBSTANCE rather than VERBATIM; every limb is supported almost word for word.
#642 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: to a far lesser extent, Aragorn, Gimli, Legolas and Éowyn
  NOTE: link.springer.com serves a Cloudflare ‘Client Challenge’ to curl (route 1 failed) and Crossref/OpenAlex/Semantic Scholar all return a null abstract (routeHint-style DOI routes failed). Recovered via Wayback raw capture 20251019112825id_ of the chapter page (route 2). Abstract: ‘This chapter examines those parts of The Lord of the Rings which are written as a third-person narrative. Most of the time the narrator presents the point of view of a group of characters, usually hobbits, or a single character: Frodo, Sam, Pippin or Merry, or, to a far lesser extent, Aragorn, Gimli, Legolas and Éowyn.’ Quote word for word (page adds one comma after ‘extent’); independently mirrored on colab.ws.
#643 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: recorded in “ordinary” language
  NOTE: Raw link.springer.com chapter page reached with a real browser (curl got a 'Client Challenge'; no Wayback capture; Crossref/OpenAlex/S2 abstracts elided). Abstract verbatim: 'While the hobbits’ points of view are recorded in “ordinary” language, other passages are characterised by an archaic diction, reminiscent of ancient epic poetry as well as Macpherson’s Ossian. They convey an omniscient point of view, usually in connection with “epic characters” like Aragorn.' Every limb present. Independently corroborated by the colab.ws Crossref mirror carrying the same abstract.
#644 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: Emphasis is laid on subjective experience rather than facts
  NOTE: Google Books search-inside p.92 verbatim: '… Pride and Prejudice, Waverley, The Mill on the Floss and Tess of the d’Urbervilles; and continued by early twentieth-century novels, such as Mary Webb, Gone to Earth (1917), and John Buchan, Witch Wood (1926). Emphasis is laid on subjective experience rather than facts. One of the earliest examples of this point-of-view technique is certainly Horace Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto: A Gothic Story (1764)…'. Nineteenth-century-practice limb: Springer abstract 'Tolkien follows nineteenth-century novelistic practice' and p.95 'limited point of view (and thus a characteristic feature of nineteenth-century “realist” writing)'; Springer endnote 9 'from Walpole’s Castle of Otranto onwards'. Ordering nuance only: the page lists the novels first, then names Walpole as one of the earliest examples.
#645 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: Tolkien's hobbits act as intermediaries
  NOTE: Google Books p.95 verbatim: 'Edward Waverley and David Sempill, Tolkien’s hobbits act as intermediaries.' (Sempill introduced p.94 as Buchan’s parish minister, 'the reader’s representative in a strange and exotic environment'; Waverley is Scott’s, p.93). Turner limb confirmed on the raw Springer page, endnote 10 (= p.123): 'A comparison between Scott’s Edward Waverley and Tolkien’s hobbits as focalizers is also established by Turner. Like Waverley in the Scottish highlands, Tolkien’s hobbits act as “representative[s] of the normality of the reader” and “take the role of inexperienced strangers in a big wide, unknown world” (Turner, “One Pair of Eyes,” 24, 22).'
#646 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: brought close to the reader through the intermediate agency
  NOTE: Google Books p.119 verbatim: '… mediation: a strange environment and chain of events is brought close to the reader through the intermediate agency of characters whose point of view is recorded. This technique apparently goes back to historical fiction, as can be seen by looking at Scott’s Waverley and Buchan’s Witch Wood.' All three limbs (mediation, strange environment/chain of events, historical-fiction ancestry) on the page.
#647 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: left to other characters, such as Gandalf or Aragorn
  NOTE: Google Books p.91 verbatim: '… why an event has occurred; this will be left to other characters, such as Gandalf or Aragorn, or to the hobbits’ own subjective conclusions.' Both limbs (narrator withholds the why; explanation devolved to Gandalf/Aragorn or the hobbits’ own conclusions) present.
#648 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: Psychonarration is reserved to Frodo
  NOTE: Google Books p.105 verbatim: 'Psychonarration is reserved to Frodo; what we learn about Gandalf is left open to his, and the reader’s speculation. Neither Frodo nor the reader know about Gandalf’s mind or Gandalf’s plans…'. Lanser attribution confirmed at p.93, where the term is introduced as '“psychonarration” (Lanser, 188)'; Lanser, The Narrative Act, is in the chapter’s Works Cited on the raw Springer page.
#649 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: hardly ever communicated to the reader
  NOTE: Google Books p.118 verbatim: '… he speaks a lot and easily converses with both the hobbits and the “heroes”, his thoughts and feelings are hardly ever communicated to the reader in the form of third-person narration. He obviously needs to remain enigmatic…'. Subject is Gandalf: p.105 makes Gandalf the withheld mind, and Springer endnote 31 says 'We only know about Gandalf’s feelings from what he speaks, so we do not know what he really thinks…'.
#650 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: we do not learn much about his thoughts and feelings
  NOTE: Both limbs on the page. p.113: 'Aragorn’s point of view is usually confined to factual perceptions'; p.114 verbatim: '… we do not learn much about his thoughts and feelings.' p.102 verbatim: 'an omniscient point of view gives way to a passage limited to the point of view of the hobbit. This obviously enables the narrator to lend greater psychological depth to Aragorn’s appearance than to that of the other warriors. At the same time, we (as readers) can only guess at what really passes in Aragorn’s mind; our position is that of Merry, our representative in the story.'
#651 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: a hobbit's point of view to each of the spreading strands
  NOTE: Google Books p.99 verbatim: 'narrative function of Merry and Pippin, however, seems to consist in allowing the novelist to take a hobbit’s point of view to each of the spreading strands of the narrative. After Frodo and Sam leave the Company at the end of book 2 to set out to Mordor on their own, Pippin and Merry are captured by Orcs.' Page says 'strands of the narrative' where the claim paraphrases 'strand of the plot' — the quoted string itself is verbatim.
#652 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: the object of Sam's gaze
  NOTE: Google Books p.108 verbatim: 'In the first two books, it was Frodo who observed and experienced the world around him. Now it is Frodo who is looked at from an outside point of view, as he becomes the object of Sam’s gaze. Frodo’s gradual fading away as a focalizer…'. Books 4 and 6 limb confirmed at p.119: '… focalizer in books 4 and 6.'
#654 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: comparatively few in number
  NOTE: Google Books p.111 verbatim: '… comparatively few in number, and some of them resemble a different type of text altogether: The “prologue” (1–16) and the accounts of Bree (149–151) and Minas Tirith (751–752)…'. Percy limb also on p.111: '“eighteenth-century antiquarianism”, as found, for example, in the manifold paratexts of Thomas Percy’ Reliques of Ancient English Poetry (1765) (Groom 291–296)' (cross-referenced from p.34 n.43, '“eighteenth-century antiquarianism” found in these texts, see below, Chap. 4'). Note for completeness: the same page also likens those passages to 'ethnographic accounts or even of travel guides' and to ancient Greek romance — the claim reports only the antiquarianism comparandum, but every limb it does assert is on the page.
#656 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: short sentences, parataxis, inversion and repetition
  NOTE: Google Books p.116 verbatim: '… short sentences, parataxis, inver-sion and repetition, as well as motifs concerning darkness and night-time, are reminiscent of Macpherson’s Poems of Ossian, as in a passage in which Fingal, the hero, approaches his enemies…'. The only departures from the claim's quote are the printed line-break hyphens in 'inver- sion' and 'night- time'. Darkness/night-motif limb present in the same sentence; Macpherson's debt also noted in Springer endnote 29 (Groom 295).
#657 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: there are few hypotactical sentences
  NOTE: Google Books p.115 verbatim: '… paratactically. More complex propositions are constructed by means of participles, while there are few hypotactical sentences. The effort involved in the journey is conveyed by means of inversions (“swift and enduring”, “forty leagues or more”) and repetition (“many leagues”, “forty leagues”).' All four limbs present. Rohirrim context confirmed on the same and next page: p.115 'Riders of Rohan, as in the passage which depicts their setting off from Edoras to the battle of Helm’s Deep'; p.116 'The account of the riding is limited to the bare facts… the archaic language and sentence construction characterizes the Riders as epical warriors'.
#658 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: p.120: "passages which feature a particular point of view mainly serve to show certain states of mind, rather than illustrating a story"; just before it, "[the passages about the Riders of] Rohan quoted above, could certainly be described as extremely vivid. Usually, they are about visual impressions, so that 'showing' might actually be an adequate term"
  NOTE: Route: Google Books search-inside on the cited volume 9uAsEAAAQBAJ (jscmd=SearchWithinVolume JSON, verbatim book text with page numbers); the volume landing page itself carries no preview text. Quote 'mainly serve to show certain states of mind' is word for word on p.120. Every limb checked by stitching overlapping snippets of the same page: p.120 sets up Lubbock and Friedman 'following Henry James, set particular store by the opposition between telling and showing, with telling being the province of an omniscient narrator, and showing occurring in passages in which a particular point of view is expressed'; the Rohan (omniscient, archaic-register) passages are then called 'extremely vivid ... about visual impressions, so that "showing" might actually be an adequate term'; and p.121 makes the inversion explicit - 'the opposite is the case: if we apply the terms of diegesis and mimesis to the Tolkien passages discussed, the Riders of Rohan passages may strike us as mimetic rather than diegetic'. Only wording difference: the book says point-of-view passages show states of mind 'rather than illustrating a story', which the claim renders 'rather than to describe action' - same import.
#659 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: p.123: "'focalisation externe' (the narrator focusing his attention on Frodo) to 'focalisation interne' (the narration records Frodo's point of view); Frodo becomes the 'focalise' (Bal 38) or 'focalizer' (Lanser 141-143)"
  NOTE: Route: Google Books search-inside on the cited volume. Quote 'Frodo becomes the "focalise"' is word for word on p.123, with the externe-to-interne shift and both attributions (Bal 38 / Lanser 141-143) in the same sentence. The preference limb is supported one page earlier, in the note apparatus at p.122: the traditional point-of-view terminology '(Lubbock, Friedman), in preference to the more sophisticated terminology which revolves around the concept of "focalization", cf. Genette 194-200; Bal 21-58; Lanser 140-148; Nunning'. Two small wording points, neither an unsupported limb: the book's word is 'traditional' rather than the claim's 'historical' (though note 9 on p.123 does call for 'a historical investigation of this phenomenon'), and that preference sentence sits on p.122, not the cited p.123. Genette is the attributed source of the focalization terminology at p.122n5 rather than beside the two French terms themselves.
#660 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: p.217: "The archaic register used by Dwarves and Men forms a stark contrast to the language of the hobbits and of the narrator, who, as we have seen, usually tells the story from the hobbits' points of view"
  NOTE: Route: Google Books search-inside on the cited volume. The quote 'usually tells the story from the hobbits' points of view' is word for word on p.217, and the whole claim sentence is a near-transcription of the book's sentence on that page - archaic register, Dwarves and Men, stark contrast, hobbits and narrator, all present. Page number confirmed as 217 by the search-inside page id. p.216 corroborates the register point: 'Dwarves and Men, rather speak in ways which do not encourage interruption. We may call their ways of speaking "literary"...'.
#661 [VERIFIED_SUBSTANCE] TW: "This psychonarration ... is typical of the realistic novel"
  NOTE: Route: live euppublishing.com returned HTTP 403 to both WebFetch and a browser-user-agent curl; recovered from the Wayback raw capture https://web.archive.org/web/20220615121435id_/https://www.euppublishing.com/doi/full/10.3366/ink.2022.0144, which carries Turner's full open-access review text. Graded SUBSTANCE rather than VERBATIM only because the claim carries no quote field to match; the review's own sentences are all but identical: 'This psychonarration, in which events are filtered through the limited point of view of an individual, is typical of the realistic novel. However, in the episodes in which no hobbits are present to act as mediators, the focus on the more "archaic" characters is reflected in narrative language more typical of an older, epic tradition which constitutes a contrasting set of pre-texts.' Both limbs supported, and the review attributes the chapter to Kullmann ('Chapter 4 concentrates on focalisation. For most of the story, Kullmann argues...').
#662 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: "Certainly they dispel any notion that there is any one 'Tolkien style' ... they demonstrate that he made skilful use of a number of different styles which resonate with a broad cross-section of the last few hundred years of writing in English"
  NOTE: Route: Wayback raw capture of the EUP page (live host 403s). Quote 'dispel any notion that there is any one "Tolkien style"' is word for word. Second limb also verbatim in the following sentence - 'skilful use of a number of different styles which resonate with a broad cross-section of the last few hundred years of writing in English'.
#663 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: "his contrast of parataxis and hypotaxis as defining these two cultures on scales of sophistication"; "The one person who fluidly moves between societies, languages, and social registers is Gandalf"
  NOTE: Route: dc.swosu.edu landing page fetched live, but its viewcontent.cgi PDF 403s to curl even with a browser user agent and referer; recovered from the Wayback raw capture https://web.archive.org/web/20230512052131id_/https://dc.swosu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=3118&context=mythlore and text-extracted from the PDF. Quote is word for word. 'These two cultures' resolves in the preceding sentence to 'military communities such as the Riders of Rohan and the defenders of Minas Tirith', i.e. the claim's Rohirrim and Gondor - a paraphrase of the review's own naming, not an unsupported limb. Gandalf limb is verbatim.
#664 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: "Gandalf and Frodo are found to be the most flexible. Sam undergoes the most evolution. Gimli and Legolas represent the most traditional registers for their typology. Merry and Pippen use common English language as befitting their role of reality-based touchstones"
  NOTE: Route: Wayback raw PDF capture of the Mythlore review (live PDF 403s). All four speaker limbs are verbatim in four consecutive sentences; the quote matches word for word. Two notes, neither an unsupported limb: Bolding identifies the chapter as 'The penultimate chapter "Language and Character"' rather than by number, and Holmes's review (this chunk's other source, scholar.valpo.edu vol14/iss1/7) independently pins that chapter as 'Chapter 9 ("Language and Character", both authors)'; and the review prints the character name as 'Pippen', a typo the claim silently corrects to 'Pippin'.
#665 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: "why Aragorn begins a pronouncement about the future with shall half again as often as Gandalf does, and seven times as often as Sam or Pippin"
  NOTE: Route: scholar.valpo.edu landing page fetched live; its viewcontent.cgi PDF 403s to curl, recovered from the Wayback raw capture https://web.archive.org/web/20250602182646id_/https://scholar.valpo.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1257&context=journaloftolkienresearch and text-extracted. Quote 'seven times as often as Sam or Pippin' is word for word, and both ratio limbs plus 'begins a pronouncement about the future with shall' are in the same sentence. Holmes presents it as one of K&S's findings ('those findings that will be ... useful to some future writer on Tolkien who wonders why...').
#666 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: "Other results tend to refute long-held views (like the prevalence and significance of archaic inversions; see K & S p. 40)"
  NOTE: Route: Wayback raw PDF capture of the Journal of Tolkien Research review (live PDF 403s). Quote 'the prevalence and significance of archaic inversions' is word for word; 'tend to refute', 'long-held views' and the page citation 'K & S p. 40' are all in the same sentence, so every limb holds.
#667 [VERIFIED_VERBATIM] TW: Holmes: "Chapter 7 ('Storytelling,' Kullmann) identifies three categories of the 45 to 50 'intercalated' stories told by twenty-three characters in the novel: simultaneous events, exposition, and 'mythological' past"; Bolding: "there are 23 story tellers"
  NOTE: Route: Wayback raw PDF captures of both reviews. The quote '45 to 50 "intercalated" stories told by twenty-three characters' is word for word in Holmes, along with the Kullmann attribution and all three category names. The final limb is attributed in the claim itself to Bolding, and it checks out on the Mythlore review (also fetched for 663/664): 'while there are 23 story tellers, each with their own style, the common purpose is to give historic context to the quest'.
