 Lies Are What A Man Needs Most: Masculinity in Robin Hobb's "Assassin's Quest" Subscribe Sign in Lies Are What A Man Needs Most: Masculinity in Robin Hobb's "Assassin's Quest" Exploring Hobb's use of emasculation to scrutinize masculinity in "Assassin's Quest" Jeffrey O Jan 20, 2025 9 2 1 Share Here is the thing with these essays. My process is quite simple. A man I pay a fair wage locks me in a room with a book. I stay in that room. For a long time. Then that employee opens the door. All that is left is a creature. Me. And a book. And an essay that is entirely too long. And about things that not many will care about. But the essay isn't for them. It's for the few who do. Welcome to Okay, I'll Tell you Anyways. If you've been following the newsletter, then you know I love Robin Hobb. Most ardently. Her writing has enraptured me, Darcy-like, body and soul. Since finishing the Farseer trilogy- following the story of FizChivalry Farseer in Assassin's Apprentice, Royal Assassin, and Assassin's Quest - I've been reflecting and meditating on its grand story. The series has breathed much inspiration into my interior life, causing me to think on the various themes the story touches. All of which came to a climactic end with the trilogy's last book, Assassin's Quest. No one who has read the series would tell you that Fitz's story is an easy one. The trilogy covers his life from a boy to a young man, where he faces bouts of incredible hardship simply because of his birthright as a bastard. Not to mention the healthy heaping of trouble his own actions get him into, though Fitz might argue differently. One of the struggles he faced that immediately grabbed me was the various instances of emasculation he experiences throughout Assassin's Quest . He has his masculinity challenged, his body violated, and behaves in ways that men might deem shameful, pathetic, and inane. Normally, the hero of an epic fantasy story epitomizes masculinity. I'm sure you can picture it. The down-trodden nobody rises to the status of hero, defeats a dark lord, saves a damsel, and becomes royalty. They are typically physically strong, often supernaturally so, such that they can cut down any evil-doer in their path. Every woman- seldom a man- looks upon the hero admirably and lustfully within seconds of meeting them. By the end of some of these stories, the hero could have an entire harem of people who have fallen head over heels for them. Oddly enough, this ability to attract, or "conquer", women is thrown into the various successes of his quest, as if getting the girl is an achievement as praiseworthy as saving the realm/world/plane-of-existence/whatever. Fitz's story follows a path we would not expect of the male fantasy protagonist. His story doesn't end with him saving a princess or getting a sweet new castle. Quite the opposite. By the end of the trilogy, almost everyone Fitz loves thinks that he is dead. His one true love turned her back on him for another man. His king betrayed and abandoned him. And the name of FitzChivalry Farseer is forever scorned for being the evil Witted bastard, guilty of attempted regicide, and whose existence threw a wrench into the proper line of succession for the Six Duchies. After saving everyone from the threat of the Outislanders and rooting out the evil from within the crown, Fitz lives in obscurity as a hermit. Forgotten by some, hated by those who remember. Fitz's "death" is celebrated by all those who remember his story and mourned by only the few who know the true story. Hobb is great at subverting expectations. So, my first reaction to this unorthodox ending was "of course." Most readers probably expected Fitz to come out on top in the end. It's what we have come to expect from male protagonists in our fantasy series. So, in order to subvert that expectation, Hobb gave us an ending where the hero doesn't end up on top- though the ending remains satisfying. Normally I would be disappointed with this sort of ending, especially given how much hardship Fitz went through to get there, but I wasn't. This feeling confused me. On paper, the fate Fitz ends up with is bad across the board, especially when we consider the events- the emasculations- leading up to the end of the story. Where does this conflicting feeling come from? How is it that we can witness all the torture Fitz went through and still claim he has a happy ending? We also don't address why Hobb went through such effort to strip Fitz of his masculinity. Why was his honor ripped from him? His integrity betrayed? Several different scenes of emasculations, let alone dozens of micro-emasculations, were simply too many for me to overlook. So I dug deeper. Upon looking back, I was able to pinpoint six instances in which Fitz is emasculated. Six flag posts, six red flags, that Hobb was waving at me. I gathered notes on these scenes and spent days reflecting with them. And what I learned was not a simple subversion of expectations. These scenes mark pivotal character development moments for Fitz's character, which make up a thematic transformation of his character. I attribute the oddly happy ending to this transformation of Fitz's nature. This development supplants the sadness or disappointment one might feel around thinking Fitz deserved an ending more fit for a male fantasy protagonist. Therein lies the secret to the duality of Assassin's Quest 's ending: Fitz's fate can be good or bad depending on which framework we chose to interpret the story. From the lens of masculinity, Fitz falls far below the ending we would expect for a male fantasy protagonist, leaving us disappointed. However, when we remove the lens of masculinity, we find a story that shows Fitz unburdening himself from masculinity's tenets and brings him peace. Such is the purpose of the six emasculations of FitzChivalry Farseer. They are tools to strip Fitz down to his foundation, so that he can learn to lead a life led by self-compassion, rather than by masculinity. Seeing Fitz live at peace with his true nature is where the reader derives satisfaction from Assassin's Quest 's ending, rather than the external indicators- fame, women, and strength- that masculinity draws upon for validation. On a more personal level, Hobb challenged me to face my personal view of masculinity. Through this lens, Assassin's Quest provides a profound meditation and reflection on masculinity, male relationships, and the values we hold our men to. By utilizing emasculation, Hobb provides six lessons to Fitz in order for his toxic relationship with masculinity to be stripped away, allowing him to come to accept the circumstances of his life and lead a life led by self-compassion. Art by Magali Villeneuve Let's start with setting the scene, for those who have not read the books or haven't in some time. (By the way, spoilers for Robin Hobb's Farseer Trilogy. Especially the third book, Assassin's Quest .) Assassin's Quest begins with FitzChivalry Farseer returning from the dead. Just a few months ago, the usurper, King Regal, killed his bastard nephew, who only survived by living within the body of his Wit companion- a wolf named Nighteyes. Fitz slowly regains his humanity but is racked with trauma. He decides to get vengeance upon his uncle who tortured and killed him, but fails. He then flees to the Mountain kingdom, where he reunites with a band of companions who all set out to find King Verity, the true king, who has not returned from his quest to find the Elderlings. On this quest and the moments in between, Fitz faces six instances of emasculation in various forms. The first is on his way to assassinate his uncle, King Regal, by a traveling minstrel named Honey. The second is with a traveling puppeteer named Tassin. The third is with another minstrel, Starling. The fourth is when Fitz witnesses his love, Molly, confess her love for another man. The fifth is when Fitz's body is used by King Verity to copulate with Queen Kettricken. And the sixth and final instance ends with Starling, again. I. Fitz and Honey After fleeing Buckkeep, Fitz finds himself traveling alone with his wolf Wit-companion, Nighteyes. Fitz is terrified of being hurt again and has lost most of the courage he used to have. The only thing motivating him to move forward is his lust for vengeance against his uncle Regal. In order to carry out his plan to assassinate Regal, Fitz needs to learn about what has become of the Six Duchies during the time he was dead and regaining his humanity, so he gathers the courage to enter a tavern to listen to some gossip. While in the tavern, Fitz joins a company of minstrels on the road. One of them being a young woman named Honey. In the middle of the night while sleeping in a barn, Honey approaches Fitz. Honey attempts to advance on Fitz. He recoils from her touch and is racked with terror. Just her touch alone is enough to recall the torture he endured at the hand of his uncle. He denies her advance. Rather than accept the rejection, Honey scorns Fitz. In response, Fitz makes up a lie, saying he recently lost his wife and doesn't have the heart to place his love with another, but Honey is offended nonetheless. Her treatment towards him over the following days is ruthless, starkly different to her warm and welcoming demeanor when they first met. She doesn't miss a chance to challenge his manhood, quite literally. "I think I know why your wife left you," Honey said nastily. "No heart, you say? I think your problem was a bit lower." She rose and went back to her blankets. All I felt was relief that she had given up on me. I kept my word and went to gather more dry wood. Here is this pretty, young woman who offers her company to Fitz. He has no reason to not take it, but yet he denies it. More than that, he is disparaged on top of it. And what is Fitz's reaction? Relief. Relief that he would no longer have to think about someone showing attraction to him. This feels a bit weak-spined of Fitz. We might expect a more masculine hero to find solace, relief, in the arms of a woman. But instead, Fitz denies her and continues to let her walk over his manhood in the company of their companions. But the humiliation doesn't end there. Another day on the road passes when suddenly Fitz and company are attacked by a group of Forged- people who have had their humanity stolen from them. They attack the group and Fitz buckles under the stress. Instead of aiding the company, Fitz runs to aid his wolf companion instead. He narrowly saves the wolf, then rushes back to help the company. By then, the Forged were able to severely harm the group and were starting to pin down and restrain Honey. Fitz approaches the Forged from behind and kills them. As Fitz ends the life of the last Forged, he has a merging of consciousnesses with the dying man through the Skill- a magical ability that can be used to manipulate other people. In this connection, Hobb explores the depths of Fitz's loneliness. It explores how the human touch can be desired but also feared. Through the same sensations Fitz felt most closest to another is also through which he experienced the most traumatic pain of his life. My mind vibrated between the extremes of killer and victim. I was both. And alone. More alone than I had ever been. Always before, at a time like this, there had been someone for me… Molly arriving with the quiet and the darkness to touch me softly. This time the battle was over, and I was alive, but no one save the wolf cared. I loved him, but suddenly I knew that I longed for human touch as well. The separation from those who had cared about me was more than I could bear. Had I been truly a wolf, I would have lifted my nose to the sky and howled. And it was, I reached out, in a way that I could not describe. Not the Wit, not the Skill, but some unholy blending of the two, a terrible questing for someone, anywhere, who might care to know I was alive. Like a moth against a window, I rattled myself against their consciousnesses. I longed to feel the affection I had taken for granted. Almost, I thought, I reached them, only to fall back exhausted into myself, sitting alone in the dust on the road, with the blood of three men spattered on me. This moment of clarity that Fitz has, though, is interrupted and overshadowed by none other than Honey. She kicked dirt on me. Her clothes were torn, her hair draggled about her face. "You ran away!" She accused me. I felt how much she despised my cowardice. "You ran away, and left him to break Piper's arm and club my father down and try and rape me. What kind of man are you? What kind of man can do a thing like that? Honey calls out Fitz's cowardice. She sees a man who runs from protecting blind men and defenseless women from the threat of being beaten and raped. Is there a fate more shameful than a man can allow to happen? Is it not the strong, courageous man who protects? The cowardly who runs? Honey calls it out clearly, "What kind of man are you?" I admit that I found part of myself agreeing with Honey. I found myself longing for the warrior Fitz we've seen before, like in the previous two books in the series. The Fitz who was not frightened to stand up for himself or others. Then comes the voice of reason. Harper Josh, even after being assaulted, chides his daughter. Fitz returned to save them. Had he not returned, they would all be dead. Plus, the reader has the exclusive knowledge of why Fitz really ran away: Nighteyes was being accosted by a Forged somewhere else. And we've seen first hand how traumatized Fitz has been after dying and returning. While Honey paints Fitz a coward, Josh says he is a hero. The sting of Honey's words are strong, while Harper Josh's are more compassionate. Instead of outright attacking Fitz, Josh empathizes that there are probably several reasons as to why he could have ran. Regardless, he still returned and stopped the Forged. Hobb presents us with two conflicting voices in this confrontation. One, Josh's, comes to Fitz's defense. He tries to tell Honey that the blame of the Forges' actions is not on Fitz, but the Forged themselves. There is an understanding that Fitz is a regular person, just like any of us. Josh provides us with more realistic expectations for Fitz. In fact, it feels unrealistic that Fitz could have somehow protected the entire company and still come out on top. I'm sure you can imagine how another writer could have handled this scene. If you had dropped another fantasy hero into this position, like an Aragorn, Eragon, or Rand Al'Thor, we wouldn't question our hero's ability to do away with three measly thralls. However, it is Honey's voice that better matches the reader's expectations for Fitz. Honey's words embody the masculine interpretation to Fitz's actions. Why didn't Fitz stop them all? How could he let this happen? Why can't we have the old Fitz back? What kind of man are you? Honey places expectations of Fitz far above what is realistically possible for him to accomplish. In Honey's heavy-handed critiques, we have an interpretation of Fitz's actions by the book of masculinity. Fitz did not manage to heroically save the troupe, he did not get the girl, and he lets his emotions outburst in a fit of loneliness. On the other hand, Josh provides a more compassionate and empathetic interpretation of the fight. Especially given the reader has the knowledge of Fitz leaving the fight to go and save Nighteyes, Josh provides several sound reasons as to why Fitz did not act along the same lines as the uber-masculine fantasy hero. And didn't he still dispatch all the Forged? Isn't there something heroic about that? Fitz's internal monologue after the fight certainly aligns more with Honey's masculine interpretations. The pain he felt during his death lives just below the surface of his skin. The mere touch of another scare him, recoiling from women who are attracted to him. And he lacks the confidence to protect himself and those around him. By having Honey emasculate Fitz, Hobb gives us a very vulnerable insight into Fitz's mental landscape- we understand how he perceives himself and his deepest fears and desires. But the inclusion of Josh's contrasting perspective primes us to begin to ponder the values we hold Fitz to. And if the values we hold him to (Honey's masculinity) only causes deeper suffering, what good are they? These are the sort of things Hobb wants us to begin considering, as they will be covered throughout the remaining emasculations. If we chart the story arc around Fitz's relationship with masculinity, this would be our establishing shot, our thesis: Does masculinity provide a set of values that build up our male protagonists- and by extension, ourselves- or tear them down? II. Fitz and Tassin The second emasculation of FitzChivalry Farseer occurs after his attempt to kill Regal and on his way to the Mountain Kingdom to find Queen Kettricken. Fitz, now a wanted man after failing to kill Regal, has dawned the guise of "Tom the Sheppard". He has joined a caravan, working for food, shelter, and transportation he otherwise could not secure on his own. One night, Fitz is left to guard the caravan's flock while the rest of the party enjoys drinks in the nearby town. Something about the loneliness- out with the flock- was becoming normal to Fitz. In fact, he finds the silence peaceful. Even without Nighteyes, who has temporarily left Fitz to join a wolf pack, we see Fitz feel a much needed moment of peace. On his watch, Fitz hears a woman crying from inside one of the carriages. Fitz seeks out the crying and finds a young woman, Tassin, who is an apprentice in the caravan's troupe of puppeteers. She is bleeding from a gash on her cheek. Tassin's master had whipped her for poorly performing her lines during a previous performance. Tassin laments that no man will ever love her now because of the scar that will form. The blemish will mark her as an unsuitable partner and undesirable to any man. Fitz takes pity on Tassin and uses his knowledge of medicine to clean the wound and reduce the scarring. Tassin is thankful and joins Fitz for his evening watch. One thing leads to another and Tassin advances on Fitz, kissing him. Fitz is overcome by something and leans into the kiss. It is not lust that compels Fitz; he specifically explains this. Instead, Fitz once again faces the immense loneliness within him, just as he did during his communion with the dying Forged: "I kissed her as if I could devour her and somehow be less lonely by doing so." After Fitz indulges in her advance, Tassin lays herself out on an unfurled cloak on the ground, inviting Fitz to join her. The coy and gentle demeanor that had entranced Fitz is dropped and replaced by the true nature of her invitation: "[it was] the same sort of challenge another fighter might offer me in a practice-yard with staves." This shift in demeanor brings Fitz out of his torrent of emotions and realizes another truth of his loneliness- that he would not be satisfied by lying with a stranger. His loneliness and pain is more than skin deep. "I looked at her, wanting her with all the lust of my months alone and untouched. But I knew also that for that deeper hunger for companionship and understanding, she offered me no more solace than any man might find in his own hand." Fitz makes a big realization here about the loneliness he feels. He mistakenly assumed that this tryst could bring some of the same understanding he felt through his relationship with his love, Molly. Where Tassin is solely physically intimate with Fitz, Molly was too, but also shared a deeper emotional bond. Out of all the people in Fitz's life, Molly held the most vulnerable understanding of Fitz. To him, that understanding is what staved off his loneliness. And there is no way that Tassin, knowing nothing about Fitz, could give him the comfort of companionship through their sex. The act would be empty. Meaningless. His desire for a deeper relationship would remain a "hollowness in me that would only be made worse by laying myself down beside a stranger." Realizing this, Fitz turns away Tassin. Much like Honey, she is offended and disparages Fitz. She calls him stupid and says that the only reason she wanted to sleep with him was out of pity. Tassin then stomps away to her carriage and slams the door shut behind her. This is the second time Fitz has been approached by an attractive woman and turned them away. With Honey, it was out of fear. With Tassin, his prudence comes from a place of a new understanding of his emotions, which may not have been possible without the lessons he learned with his encounter with Honey. While there is some emotional growth shown through this sequence, Fitz still fails to embody the masculine hero. While other stories might have the hero sleep with several different people and not have any consequences from doing so, Hobb challenges the expectation. Why? Why challenge this? And for what purpose? The way we leave Fitz at the end of this scene might give us a glimpse into what Hobb might be trying to get us to think about. I stooped slowly to pick my cloak up and shake the dust from it. Then, the night having become suddenly colder with a rising wind, I put it around my shoulders and sat down again to stare into my fire. It's a rather peaceful scene. The pain from emasculation feels almost nonexistent. After Tassin leaves, he simply returns to his peaceful solitude to sink deeper into his pensive stare. One might question how Fitz is so unphased from this interaction. There doesn't seem to be any effort from Hobb to have Fitz try and restore his masculinity to the reader. Even in his lonesome, Hobb doesn't let Fitz do anything other than sit. In doing so, Hobb decides to not restore any sense of masculinity to us, the reader, nor any characters in the story. Fitz doesn't get the girl, he denies her. More than that, he chooses to elevate his emotional welfare over a tryst with a stranger. This scene with a more masculine hero could be expected to play out by the hero lying with Tassin. Then, the conquest of Tassin then could be used as a demarcation for his strength, as if his virility equates to masculinity. What does, then, prudence signify? Emasculation? Cowardice? Impotence? What about instead self-respect? Insightfulness? Confidence? The reaction of Fitz denying himself pleasure and ignoring the expectations set upon men shows a new found understanding of his emotions. It is in tearing down Fitz's masculinity that Hobb causes Fitz to question its basis. And we begin to question what good these expectations set upon men are in the first place. III. Fitz and Starling After leaving the caravan and briefly being captured by Regal's men, Fitz arrives at the town of Blue Lake. He learns that Regal's men have closed the border between the Six Duchies and the Mountain Kingdom. In order to sneak over the closed border, Fitz joins up with smugglers who are transporting pilgrims from the Six Duchies into the Mountain Kingdom. Among Fitz's company is a minstrel named Starling. Starling reveals that she knows quite a lot about FitzChivalry. After she susses out Fitz's real identity, she recounts all the stories she has heard about him. All the ugly ones that Fitz has heard before. But also one about the time her brother was positioned at Antler Island Tower during an Outislander raid. None other than the bastard himself, FitzChivalry, saved Starling's brother's life. Consequently, FitzChivalry was remembered as a hero by her family and hometown. To Starling, FitzChivalry is a hero. Is he also Witted? A king killer? So people say, but she will never forget what Fitz did for her family and her Duchy. How long had it been since FitzChivalry heard something good about himself? A long time. Being a man who was believed dead, used dark magics to come back to life, then attempted to kill the King, there were few who had anything nice to say about the bastard. But Starling's story about Antler Island Tower has a profound effect on FitzChivalry: I stood for a time staring at the closed door. FitzChivalry. Hero. Just words. But it was as if she had lanced something inside me, drained away some poison and now I could heal. It was the strangest feeling. Get some sleep, I advised myself. I actually felt as if I could. After this exchange, Starling becomes a trusted companion to FitzChivalry. It is the first person he has met in some time who knows of his good deeds and actually believes him to be a hero. FitzChivalry and Starling depart Blue Lake to the Mountain Kingdom with the smugglers. The two keep each other company on the journey, as Starling believes that following Fitz will bring her the inspiration to pen an amazing song that could secure her spot in a Lord's keep somewhere. They seek refuge in a barn one night after a few days into their journey. Fitz lays down for bed in a stall and Starling joins him. It's cold. Thus begins a new sequence of emasculation. This instance of emasculation happens on several levels. On one level, we will see Fitz deny having sex with a woman, once again. On the other, we will witness a different, less superficial kind of emasculation. This emasculation occurs at the cost of Fitz's emotions as he opens himself up to Starling. This comes during Fitz's attempt to let down his walls, by attempting to go beyond the masculine stoicism by sharing his thoughts and feelings to Starling. As Fitz does so, Starling meticulously brings to light how foolish and contrived Fitz's feelings are and the values they are based upon. The emasculation begins when Starling asks if Fitz has anyone else he cares about besides Verity and Nighteyes. "Molly. She's my wife," Fitz embellishes. He also notes that Molly and Fitz have a daughter. At this point in Assassin's Quest , it has been established that one of the prime motivators for Fitz to complete his quest is returning home to Molly and his daughter. Then, Fitz can finally leave all of these adventures and assassinations behind in exchange for a quiet life with his one true love and their daughter. This is a long standing dream Fitz has held throughout all the books in the trilogy. Fitz bares his emotional throat to Starling, and she devours it. "A wife?" Starling says incredulously. She doubts it. Fitz bashfully admits that though they never truly married, he still feels a level of devotion to her and their daughter as deep as any true husband would. How romantic! Starling then begins to consider how Fitz can believe in the dream he has of returning to a family. How can Fitz expect Molly to wait for him to return from his quest. Doesn't Molly think Fitz is dead? Why would she remain loyal to a dead man? Even if she remained single, can Fitz seriously expect to simply arrive home one day and seamlessly begin a happy life with his wife and child? No, Fitz reluctantly agrees. In fact, Fitz knows that Molly would be livid at him. Not only did Fitz not tell her about coming back from the dead, but the truth of Fitz being Witted and attempting regicide has come out. Molly has probably had her entire understanding of Fitz changed since hearing word of wielding dark magics and trying to kill the king. Through Starling's humbling line of questioning, Fitz realizes how far-fetched his dream of reuniting with Molly was. Here is Fitz trying to reveal his emotional interior with someone. Fitz doffs his hardened exterior and is jabbed in the stomach. His entire motivation to continue on his quest and survive has been dismantled by Starling in a matter of a few sentences. Fitz's motivation is exposed to feel so unrealistic that it feels on the same level of soundness as the wild fantasy of a prepubescent boy. Fitz is gutted. Warmth leaves his body. The single flame that kept him trudging forward into the future is fractured into a fragile vision. It is almost cute that he believed he could simply return to Molly and expect things to be okay. In this form, emasculation appears through the invalidation of a man's emotions. In minimizing his dream. He is punished for caring. For believing in love. As if the love he felt for Molly would keep her faithful to a man she believes dead and a wielder of dark magics. As a sprinkle on top of the terrible cake that Starling has baked Fitz, Starling points out that the very man keeping watch over Molly in Fitz's absence is a better partner for Molly than Fitz ever was. He is a man who protects her, is handsome, loyal, and honorable. Sounds like quite the catch! So, not only is Fitz emasculated by having his feelings dismantled, but also in being reduced in comparison to another man- Burrich, the man who raised Fitz, no less- better suited to be Molly's partner. What kind of man has his woman stolen from him? In the few instances when the hero of the story doesn't end up with the girl, when has he ever lost her to a companion of the hero's? This tirade ends with Fitz ceasing his conversation with the minstrel. He tries to find sleep in the stall, to let this night fade into history. Starling prods the dismantled faith Fitz has to Molly. The childish motivation. The fantasy of finding a happy ending. She realizes that she may have gone too far. "Come now, Fitz" she whispers. Starling is cold, so she snuggles closer to Fitz. She places a hand on his hip. Offers to keep them both warm. But, Fitz rollsover with his back to Starling, shutting her out entirely. Childish or not, Fitz denies Starling. Again our hero passes up another offer of sex, but this time on a shakier foundation than the previous two times. Loyalty to Molly was a large part of the reason for denying Honey and Tassin. But Fitz no longer believes in that loyalty. What then, he wonders, is his basis for denying Starling? Starling rolls away. She doesn't attack Fitz like Honey and Tassin did, though. Instead, she nods in understanding and goes to bed. In the absence of backlash, Fitz recognizes that Starlings offer was not superficial like Honey's and Tassin's. The companionship Starling could offer Fitz could mean something given how Starling views Fitz for who he really is, not just some stranger. Fitz notices himself longing to pull Starling back closer to him. Instead, Fitz says it would be wise to go to sleep. "So I did, but not right away and not without regrets." So then, we see Fitz's masculinity evolve once more with another challenge to his emotions and sexuality. At first, we readers may have been able to buy into Fitz's dream of returning to a life with Molly. I would argue that this is the most noble thing our hero might aspire to. Even beyond death, Fitz holds strong to his love. It sounds heroic. Romantic, even. But we see how inane his beliefs are when Starling dismantles them. This exposes the weakness of the foundation at which these stories of devotion are built upon. It makes the aspiration of a happily-ever-after ending for Fitz feel empty and hollow, and this hollowness is shaped by the insecurities hidden within him. The insecurity that Fitz is not a good enough man to be faithful to. Or one worthy of love. In this way, Starling lacerates the fragile threads that currently hold Fitz together. But then, if these threads were so thin to begin with, why ought we believe in them to begin with? Furthermore, we see that continuing to follow these beliefs blindly ends up with Fitz missing a chance to connect with Starling. Why does he continue to follow these rules if they don't bring him true hope and deny him the chance to grow closer to others? Past this point, Fitz begins to closely inspect the ties that keep him to Molly. He doesn't completely give up on hope that maybe they could have a life together, but instead of blindly continuing to follow, Fitz finds a newer and stronger motivator to continue: his daughter. Fitz realizes that regardless of whether he returns or not, his daughter remains in danger. Not only in danger of being captured by Regal, but also by his mentor, Chade. Since Fitz's daughter is a Farseer heir, she would have a claim to the throne before Regal. Thus, she can be used as a tool to take back the crown from Regal. But in doing so, her life would be nothing more than that of a tool. Much like Fitz, her life would be devoted to the crown and devoid of the freedom to choose the life she wants to lead. Fitz will not have this. Whether Molly takes him back at this point, he does not care (though he certainly hopes), what matters is keeping her daughter safe. This becomes Fitz's new motivation. Not only this, but the small sliver of regret that stays with Fitz about denying Starling becomes an important signifier, in that there seems to be a potential for Fitz to connect with someone in a similar manner as Molly; He could connect with Starling in a way that is not purely physical, but emotional as well. It could be something more than mere conquest. But that comes later. First, Fitz needs to face a fate Starling predicted: losing Molly to a better man. IV. Fitz watches Molly confess her love to Burrich The next two instances of emasculation happen in quick succession. At this point in the story, Fitz and his party have found Verity deep in the wilderness. They find Verity carving a dragon out of magic stone and filling it with his memories and emotions. Except he doesn't have enough. In order for Verity to finish his dragon, Fitz offers to sacrifice himself for the good of saving the kingdom. He offers his "life." Before making this sacrifice, Fitz wishes to use the Skill to seek out Molly and his daughter. To see her one last time. Fitz's vision is projected into a dark room. Burrich sleeps and is stirred awake by Molly. They are in an inn after their home was invaded by King Regal's men seeking Fitz's daughter. With their home abandoned and on the run, Burrich and Molly ponder on the different options they have before them. Burrich suggests moving to a nearby town under the guise of man and wife. They could claim that Fitz's daughter is Molly and Burrich's. To cement this claim, Burrich says he would be willing to lie before the Witness Stones- stones that vows and oaths are sworn in the presence of, as it is believed to be catastrophically bad luck to do so. Molly is taken aback by Burrich's devotion to her and her daughter's safety. Surely Burrich couldn't possibly be serious! But he is. Molly says, however, that he need not lie if they were to actually marry. Burrich says that this isn't necessary. Molly redoubles the idea, pointing out her confession of love to the bone-headed Burrich. She is in love with him. And wants to take Burrich as her husband. Fitz watches on as Molly claims Burrich to be the only man who ever showed her true love and devotion. Not her drunkard father who beat her. Nor a lying Bastard who chose duty over love. The lowly, but comely, Burrich. The humble, but strong. The last of Fitz's vision fades as Molly extinguishes the candle and Burrich embraces her in the darkness. V. Verity uses Fitz's body to be with Kettricken Once the vision fades, Fitz is shattered. As if this year of ceaseless danger and survival wasn't enough, as if the trauma of dying and learning to reclaim his humanity wasn't enough, Fitz witnesses Molly claim another man, just before Fitz pays the ultimate price. Up until this point, the plan as to how Fitz will give his life for Verity to finish his dragon is unknown. It is important to note how Verity frames the sacrifice Fitz has to make. They both repeatedly say that Fitz will have to sacrifice "his life". This, in our minds, immediately registers that Fitz will die. However, this is not the case. But, Hobb's choice of words and Fitz's "death" allow for a broad range of interpretations as to what Hobb wants us to take away from the emasculation. This is going to be strange to anyone who hasn't read the book, so I will put it as plainly and literally as possible. In order to finish the dragon, Verity needs more strong emotions and vitality to put into the dragon, but Verity's body is drained and empty. So, Verity switches bodies with Fitz using the Skill, switching their consciousnesses with the other. Then, Verity- now inside Fitz's body- goes to his queen, beds her, then returns to the dragon and puts his passion and love from their encounter into the dragon. This last pinch of passion is enough to finish the dragon. Then, Fitz returns to his body and Verity's body dies as his soul enters the dragon. …yeah. Alot to digest here. Let's remember what Verity said Fitz's sacrifice would cost him: "his life". Hobb primes us to think this sacrifice would kill Fitz. But it didn't. So then. We think: what did Hobb mean by "his life"? Was this a cheap trick from Hobb to ratchet up the tension for the reader? I've read almost five books by Hobb at this point. Hobb is not cheap. She is challenging us to think. Think deeper. What sort of message does this sacrifice mean in succession of the previous four emasculations? This sacrifice to me feels like the climax of the story of Fitz surrounding his masculinity. In some ways, this betrayal from Verity feels like a fate similar to death, as Hobb leads us to believe through her choice of language surrounding the cost of Fitz's willingness to help Verity. Fitz's body is violated . His body is taken to engage sexually in a way that he is not comfortable with. Though it is a sacrifice he is willing to make, I would not go as far as to say it was consensual. One way we can understand how violated Fitz feels is by how little he explofres his emotions surrounding the event. Remember, Fitz is our narrator. He may not be reliable. Within the context of the narration, this section of Fitz's story feels peeled back. More reserved. It is as if Fitz is too ashamed to admit to the full extent of how violated he felt. But, it shows through his actions. The next time he passes by Verity's wife, Kettricken, Fitz has a visceral nervous reaction and flees from camp. Once he gets to the nearby stream, he furiously rubs the scent of Kettricken from his body and can still feel the violation of his body upon his skin. It is a feeling he will never be able to escape. As he wades in the river, Fitz has nothing. He wears countless scars from trauma and torture, both physical and emotional. He has lost the love of his life to another man. And his body was used and violated by the man he trusted with his whole heart. "I decided that I could take my whole skin off and still not feel free of what had happened." His life has crumbled around him and there is nothing left for him to cling to. There is no more honor. No more fidelity. His notions of chivalry are fruitless. Throughout Assassin's Quest , we've slowly dismantled Fitz's beliefs tied to masculinity. I believe the sacrifice of "his life" is the end of his life founded on masculinity. The masculine foundation that tied him to toxic beliefs that brought him pain and suffering. It has brought nothing but pain to him. In some storytelling frameworks, there is a brief moment just before the climax of the story in which our protagonist hits rock bottom. This event is often called the "dark night of the soul", as everything around the hero seems absolutely hopeless. So is this moment for FitzChivalry, as he doesn't seem to care about anything anymore. Not about Molly, his daughter, or saving the Six Duchies. Nothing. The "dark night of the soul" is an important part of the story, though. When the hero has nothing left, they can start to build something new. The father of the Hero's Journey himself, Joseph Campbell, says, "The dark night of the soul comes just before revelation. When everything is lost, and all seems darkest, then comes the new life and all that is needed." And Fitz does. With his previous life taken from him, he has no other choice but to begin anew. VI. Fitz and Starling again Fitz at his lowest numbly scrubs his body of invisible filth. Filth only recognizable to a ruined and tarnished body. His most trusted companion, Nighteyes, comes to comfort him. Fitz sends him away. Even the company of his Wit-bonded brother is too much to bear. Then Starling comes to him. Despite his reluctance to have her around, Starling stays. The two have been able to connect before, perhaps Fitz recognizes potential for this again through his daze. After Starling apologizes about Molly, the two exchange a candid proposal: 'Fitz,' she said quietly. 'I asked you once, for yourself. In gentleness and friendship. To chase a memory away.' She looked away from me, at the sunlight glinting on the stream. 'Now I offer that,' she said humbly. 'But I don't love you,' I said honestly. And instantly knew that it was the worst thing I could have said just then. Starling sighed and set her harp aside. 'I know that. You know that. But it was not a thing that had to be said just now.' 'And I know that now. It is just that I don't want any lies, spoken or unspoken…' She leaned over me and stopped my mouth with hers. After a time she lifted her face a little. 'I am a minstrel. I know more about lying than you will ever discover. And minstrels know that sometimes lies are what a man needs most. In order to make a new truth of them.' Starling recognizes Fitz has been gutted of all that he held near and dear. There is nothing left for Fitz to cling to, no basis for his behaviors and beliefs. His faith in masculinity to provide any amount of comfort is gone entirely. In fact, any attempt to fall back only brings forth pain- memories of betrayal, loneliness, and the most immediate feeling of violation. And by accepting Starling's proposal, he is not reinforcing any previous sense of masculine sexuality. Here, sex is offered as a means of comfort. It is not glorified in any way. There is no conquest. No domination. If anything, there is pity. Fitz acknowledges his fragile state. He pleads for there to be no "lies, spoken or unspoken." I take this to mean that their coitus will not adhere to an invisible code, like the masculine, that has only brought Fitz pain. No lies of expectations. No lies of fidelity. No lies of an undying love. No lies regarding motivation or good intentions. Instead he accepts Starling with softness and tenderness. As Starling says, what Fitz needs right now is a lie. He needs her to comfort him in this vulnerable moment. If either of them are going to be able to recover from their situations, he needs some semblance of a connection to another person he loves. While he may not love Starling in the way he loved Molly, or even Verity, it holds the similar form. The shape of it is the familiar, as well as the vehicle in which their connection is established. Through the lens of masculinity, this exchange seems emasculating. Masculinity would say that this scene reduces Fitz to a sniveling child, who is finally able to "score" with a woman from her pity of him. Fitz upholds no traits of the main hero of a fantasy novel. But when we reflect on what Fitz truly needs in this moment, this scene acts as a perfect lesson on relationships for Fitz. But through this emasculation, Fitz makes a realization, one that he does not state directly, but the remainder of Assassin's Quest contains evidence of this change in mindset. Through the "lie" of sex- an act of emasculation usurped by shifting the masculine paradigm- Starling creates a new truth for Fitz. This "new truth" is a new creed from which he can live his life. A creed devoid of the lies about manhood according to masculinity. In this final act of emasculation, Fitz has the last of his connection to the masculine dissolve away. Or rather, his dependence on the masculine. Starling causes Fitz to become aware that holding himself to these standards will do nothing but continue to eat away at him from the inside. Without tearing down this belief entirely- for Fitz to "die", as Hobb chose to frame it- Fitz would not be able to recover from his dark night of the soul and the hero who saves the kingdom. In a thematic way, Fitz has died. And this makes room for a new life to begin. VII. Breaking the cycle It takes no stretch of the imagination to conclude that Fitz is in a tough place towards the end of Assassin's Quest . Fitz typically has a hard time adjusting to his new set of circumstances following the climax at the end of each book. At the end of Assassin's Apprentice , we see Fitz scarred by a close encounter with death. As a result of nearly drowning and a heavy dose of poison, Fitz's body starts to regularly succumb to seizures. At the end of Royal Assassin , Fitz is tortured, dies, and comes back to life. Not only does this resurrection have permanent alterations to his psyche, Fitz is traumatized by the agonizing days leading up to his death and sharing the body of his wolf companion, Nighteyes. Fitz undergoes equally harrowing trouble throughout Assassin's Quest . He was betrayed by several of his closest companions, lost the love of his life, and his name remains stained even after his sacrifices save the Six Duchies from the threat of raids from the Outislanders. However, at the end of Assassin's Quest , Fitz rebounds in a way that he wasn't able to in the previous two books. This is all thanks to the "new truth" Starling is able to show him in the last act of emasculation. Fitz has always used masculinity as a basis to formulate a response to the consequences of each book. The seizures he is left with after Assassin's Apprentice , he loathes the "weak" state he has entered. There is shame surrounding how he regards his body and equates his lack of strength to being a weak person. At the end of Royal Assassin , the only way Fitz is able to overcome the great trauma he has inherited from his death and resurrection, he is overcome by a lust for revenge, consequently pushing away everyone who cares about him in order to satiate said lust. Both of these responses follow closely how many other male protagonists might react to this challenges, but we see Fitz adopt Starling's new truth after the climax of Assassin's Quest . Fitz has no desire to return to the "man" he used to be, or the boy who cared so much about meeting masculine standards. There is no more self-deprecation about not standing up to danger like he would have as a naive, unmarred, young man. There is no resentment for the boy who wasn't "strong enough" to withstand seizures and chronic pain. His self-hatred, self-shame, and self-loathing for not living up to the masculine paradigm are gone altogether. Rather than think of himself as weak and powerless for not being able to meet these standards, Fitz accepts the new life he has and the new circumstances he finds himself in. Instead of returning to the creed of masculinity that only ever brought him internal suffering, Fitz breaks the cycle with Starling's new truth. The small window Fitz affords us into his life after the climax of the story gives us an idea of his life after ceasing to try and live up to the masculine. Rather than return to being an Assassin- a job displaying the masculine traits of violence, conquest, and self-sacrifice- Fitz becomes a scribe, a trade he excelled in throughout his whole life, but never followed in order to fulfill his duty as King Shrewd's assassin. Rather than go on another love-conquest to find a new mate, Fitz becomes a hermit and a parent, but not through any sort of consummation or tryst, but through none other than Starling. Not in that they have a child together, but rather she simply drops off a boy who she picked up along her travels as a minstrel. Speaking of which, Fitz continues his relationship with Starling, holding her friendship near and dear, but also continuing to have seemingly noncommittal, casual sex. All while maintaining a sustained friendship and respect. This portrayal of our masculine hero is not what one might come to expect. There is no princess saved, no true love. The hero is not lauded by the realm and given riches. Fitz instead lives in hiding while the entire kingdom continues to believe the hero of the kingdom is King Regal, the reviled villain of the series. So then, what are we supposed to make of this ending of Fitz's life thus far? One might argue that this is a sad ending for Fitz. In relation to many other masculine fantasy heroes, his fate is a bad one. However, Hobb makes it clear that this is not a bad ending for Fitz. Though many of the losses he endured were great, Fitz has finally come to a place where he is content with his new life. The trauma of his past does not bother him as much. Even when he does have a traumatic episode, or recalls his painful memories, reliving them in his flesh, Fitz does not curse his broken body. Instead, he has taken to listening to his body and taking care of it. Though begrudgingly, Fitz no longer tries to form his identity around traits that do not serve him. Furthermore, he has come to understand that it is following these "lies" that brought about much of his suffering. Rather than try to be the masculine, Fitz simply is Fitz. VIII. Living the new truth While we know Fitz's story ends in a way that may be unfit for the traditional male hero, we see his story as a transformative one. Throughout the series, and specifically in Assassin's Quest , Hobb masterfully scrutinizes masculinity as a basis by which one forms their identity. The act of emasculation is then used as a tool by Hobb in order to illuminate how detrimental the creed of masculinity can be. Readers are shown this through a series of hard lessons learned by way of emasculation. This culminates in a final act of emasculation where Hobb is able to deftly reframe a circumstance that could be seen as emasculating by masculine standards to show alternative bases for one's beliefs. and values can be healing. Fitz's masculinity is slowly torn away until there is nothing left. Only when there is nothing left does Starling show him a new truth in order to live his life by, or rather shows him the folly of forming one's identity around masculine characteristics. Assassin's Quest - and the entire Farseer trilogy- stands as a powerful story about transformation. Upon closer look, finding one's identity lies at the heart of much of the conflict Fitz endures in his early life. Much of this trouble is caused by Fitz's devotion to the masculine paradigms he desperately tries to emulate. Considering how opposite the fate of our hero compares to that of a traditional masculine fantasy hero, Hobb asks the reader to think upon the stories they've previously accepted with masculine heroes. Are the heroes given what they need to succeed simply by being a man? How does the masculine conflict with being truly honorable and altruistic? How realistic are the reactions of others surrounding the hero? These are only a few questions that came to mind when reexamining stories I've previously accepted. The reader can then take the themes of the Farseer trilogy a step further and scrutinize their own relationship with masculinity. How are the ways in which adhering to masculine traits actually benefits them? Does their adherence to masculinity foster feelings of compassion or shame? When Fitz attempts to act against his own emotions and intuitions in order to live by the masculine, he is sad and depressed. The trouble he finds himself in only seems to get worse when he stubbornly refuses to change his behavior. But when Fitz does listen to the needs of his mind and body- despite others' expectations of him- Fitz is at peace. Is he always accepted by the greater people? No. But this cost is undoubtedly worth the harmony Fitz finds after the Red Ship Wars. This is shown through Starling's final act of emasculation, pushing Fitz to abandon any desire to adhere to the lie of the masculine and embrace the new truth of self-compassion. My favorite part about reading Robin Hobb are the ways in which she subverts my expectations. Any time I pick up one of her books, I can always expect several powerful character and plot moments that will follow me forever. Furthermore, I know the books will follow me for weeks after I finish them. She allows all of the details to serve not only each character's story, but applies frames of perspective that allows readers to dig for deeper meanings in her stories. Such is the case with Assassin's Quest and masculinity. As I read Hobb's second trilogy- the Liveship Traders trilogy- I can already see where Hobb is planting seeds to challenge my understanding of masculinity once again, but more so regarding the treatment of women. There has not been another story that has given me so many original ways for me to scrutinize both genders and the expectations placed upon them by society. Fitz's story continues on after the end of the Farseer trilogy that I have not yet read, but knowing the depth of emotion available to us in Assassin's Quest , I am even more interested to see the new ways Hobb will challenge me with with her Tawny Man and Fitz and the Fool trilogies. Subscribe for more analyses like these. Long live long-form content! Subscribe 9 2 1 Share Previous Next Discussion about this post Comments Restacks 'Round the Hearth Jan 22, 2025 Liked by Jeffrey O holy cow this is a long one! I will re-comment when I've actually finished reading I just wanted to tell you I'm proud of you first. Reply Share 1 reply by Jeffrey O 1 more comment... Top Latest Discussions No posts Ready for more? Subscribe © 2026 Jeffrey O · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice Start your Substack Get the app Substack is the home for great culture 