George R.R. Martin on Sex, Fantasy, and 'A Dance With Dragons' - Rachael Brown - Entertainment - The Atlantic
 Your browser is no longer supported.
 For maximum compatibility
 we recommend upgrading to a newer version of IE,
 or another browser such as Chrome,
 Safari,
 or Firefox.
 Skip Navigation
 The Atlantic Home
 Thursday, July 14, 2011
 Go
 Follow the Atlantic »
 Politics
 Presented By 
 Bachmann's Church Says the Pope is the Antichrist
 Joshua Green
 Can Huntsman Win in a Red-Meat Era?
 Josh Kraushaar
 Eric Cantor: Least Valuable Player
 James Fallows
 Business
 Presented by 
 Bernanke to Ron Paul: Gold Isn't Money
 Daniel Indiviglio
 The Giant Wall Street-Washington Disconnect 
 Megan McArdle
 The Internet Can Still Save the Economy
 Rob Atkinson
 Entertainment
 Presented By 
 6 Stories to Watch in Baseball Right Now
 Jake Simpson
 Harry Potter: What the Movies Really Got Right
 Dave Thier
 When Did the NBA Become Republican?
 Jeremy Gordon
 International
 Presented By 
 Egypt's Path to Democracy
 Daniel Brumberg
 Images from Gaza's Reconstruction
 Reese Erlich
 Not Only Murdoch: Assange on Trial
 Raymond Bonner
 Technology
 Presented By 
 The Last Space Shuttle Mission: Flight Day 5
 Nicholas Jackson
 Netflix's New Pricing Plan Is Going to Cost You
 The Atlantic Wire
 Picture of the Day: Practice Shuttle Landing
 Nicholas Jackson
 National
 Presented By 
 Another Dust Bowl?
 Brian Resnick
 Which Comes First: Politics or Comedy?
 Ta-Nehisi Coates
 Corporations Win, the Little Guy Loses
 Andrew Cohen
 Life
 Presented By 
 The Hot Dog Files: Our Sausage-Hating Era
 Daniel Fromson
 Food Fights From the Aspen Ideas Festival
 Corby Kummer
 Before Disney: 5 Pioneers of Early Animation
 Maria Popova
 Magazine
 Presented by 
 The Triumph of New-Age Medicine
 David H. Freedman
 How to Land Your Kid in Therapy
 Lori Gottlieb
 The Real Mahatma Gandhi
 Christopher Hitchens
 video
 Presented By 
 The 14 Biggest Ideas of 2011
 Jennie Rothenberg Gritz
 How Trophy Kids End Up in Therapy
 Jennie Rothenberg Gritz
 The Mind of Larry David
 Jennie Rothenberg Gritz
 Rachael Brown 
 - Rachael Brown is a writer and analyst for Bellwether Education Partners, a nonprofit organization working to improve educational outcomes for low-income students. A former Atlantic editor, she has written for The Guardian and Smithsonian.com, among other outlets. She is also a former public high school teacher.
 All Posts
 Share
 «
 Previous Entertainment
 | 
 Next Entertainment
 »
 Email
 Print
 Close
 George R.R. Martin on Sex, Fantasy, and 'A Dance With Dragons'
 By Rachael Brown
 Jul 11 2011, 12:35 PM ET
 Comment
 The author of the 'Game of Thrones' series talks about his newest novel, and the joys and challenges of writing genre fiction
Karolina Webb
 Many will be relieved to know that A Dance With Dragons, the long-awaited fifth entry in George R. R. Martin's A Song of Ice and Fire series, is
 infinitely more satisfying than its predecessor, 2005's bleak and plodding A Feast for Crows. The aspects of Martin's work that have endeared
 him to fans are abundant here—rich world building, narrative twists and turns, and gritty depictions of the human struggle for power. Characters who
 were sorely missed in Feast—Daenerys Targaryen, Tyrion Lannister, and Jon Snow—make up more than a third of the novel, and Martin is wise enough
 to give us at least a chapter from (almost) everyone else.
 Weaknesses that have plagued Martin's previous books are also present: too much repetition, unexceptional prose, and characters who use the same idioms
 (and have sex in exactly the same manner) no matter their ethnicity, social class, or continent. But while A Dance with Dragons cries out for
 better editing, it remains entirely engrossing. Martin has hidden so many clues and red herrings throughout his previous volumes that it is a thrill to
 see certain pieces fall into place.
 Much of the action in Dance takes place away from Westeros, across the Narrow Sea and along Slaver's Bay, where the exiled Tyrion has fled and
 Daenerys is preparing for both war and an onslaught of suitors. In fact, we see little of King's Landing, and the political intrigue that occupied
 previous books. Winter has very nearly come, and with it increased desperation and treachery, especially at the Wall, where Jon Snow is attempting to
 negotiate a fragile peace between the Night's Watch, the surviving wilding clans, and Stannis Baratheon, one of the claimants to the Iron Throne. The
 magic that re-entered the world with Dany's dragons is also gaining strength, along with the religious fervor that it inspires.
 Martin strives to keep his reader engaged, and often succeeds, although his penchant for unpredictability means that the reader is increasingly
 skeptical of cliff-hangers, especially deaths, which rarely seem to stick. Let me put it this way: If one central character who appears to be almost
 certainly dead at the end of Dance actually is, I'll be both devastated, and very impressed.
 We spoke to Martin last week about the challenges of building a fictional universe, the sexual politics of his writing, and why science fiction and
 fantasy are conquering the world.
Bantam
 Do you consider your writing as falling within the fantasy genre? What are the advantages to working within a specific genre? How does it help you
 tell your story?
 I don't want to deny that I write in fantasy, I think I obviously do. There's magic and there's dragons and swords, and all the traditional trappings
 of fantasy here. But I've also written in other genres in the past, a lot of science fiction, horror, and books that are strange hybrids of all of
 these things.
 I've always agreed with William Faulkner—he said that
 the human heart in conflict with itself is the only thing worth writing about. I've always taken that as my guiding principle, and the rest is just set
 dressing. I mean, you can have a dragon, you can have a science fiction story set on a distant planet with aliens and starships, you can have a western
 about a gunslinger, or a mystery novel about a private eye, or even literary fiction—and ultimately you're still writing about the human heart in
 conflict with itself. So that's the way I try to approach this thing. And while I may work within a genre, I've never liked to be bound by them. I have
 a lot of fun in frustrating genre expectations, using a bit of this or a bit of that, and doing something that hasn't been done before.
 Do you think that being associated with fantasy limits the expectations or responses that people have to your work? 
 It does to an extent, certainly. But I think that's changing. I'm 62 years old, I sold my first story in 1971 and I started reading this stuff in the
 '50's and '60's, when I was still a kid. The prejudice against all genre literature, but particularly science fiction and fantasy, was very strong
 then. I had books taken away from me in school by teachers saying, "Oh you shouldn't read this stuff, it will rot your mind." A lot of markets didn't
 want to consider it either—you just had specialized magazines.
 But science fiction and fantasy have really conquered the world, especially in popular culture. There are also wonderful writers out there like Michael
 Chabon, who are trying to break down these genre barriers, who are writing things that are demonstrably science fiction or fantasy, and yet are getting
 a lot of literary respect. You're seeing mainstream writers who are taking the tropes and themes of genre and writing so-called "literary fiction" out
 of it. So I think all the barriers are eroding and will continue to erode.
 That's not to say there aren't still some places where the older attitudes prevail, but I don't think they will prevail for much longer. A hundred
 years from now they will be gone, and it will all be what it was to begin with—just stories, without marketing labels placed on them.
 How do you view A Dance with Dragons's place within the larger narrative of A Song of Ice and Fire? 
 It's a bit unusual because of what happened with the fourth book, A Feast for Crows. When I was writing that book, it became so large that in
 2003 or 2004 my editors and I realized that it would have to be split into two books. It wasn't finished at that point, but ultimately I made the
decision to split the book geographically, since my characters were spread out across the world—to tell the story completely for some characters in A Feast for Crows, and to tell the story for some different characters, but within the same time frame, in A Dance with Dragons. In that
 sense, A Dance with Dragons is not the fifth book, but is more like four B. The two books run in parallel, and both begin five minutes after the
 end of A Storm of Swords. 
 Given the reaction to your decision to split these two books, and the 
 controversy
 over
 the wait
 between them, would you make the same decision again? 
 You know, given the realities, I would. If the publishing world was different—if we could publish a physical book that was 3,000 pages long that
 wouldn't fall apart, and if my fans and editors and publishers had wanted to wait—then I might have made a different decision. If I hadn't split the
 books, it still might only be coming out this year, and people would have waited 10 years for the book instead of waiting five. It was a difficult
 decision, but I think given the realities of what I was faced with, it was the best decision.
 Do you still think you'll be able to wrap everything up in the remaining two books? 
 I certainly hope so! That's my plan, that's my intent, that's what I'm going to try to do. But at this point I know better than to promise anything and
 write it out in blood.
 I think some fans are hoping we'll end up with eight books. 
 Well, it's grown in the past—I'm not going to say those fans are wrong. When I started out, it was a trilogy. Back in 1994 when I sold this, it was
 going to be A Game of Thrones, A Dance with Dragons, The Winds of Winter—three books. But that scheme went out the window before I'd even
 finished the first book. I think it was Tolkien who said when he was writing The Lord of the Rings, "The tale grew in the telling."
 Some who follow your work have 
 voiced
 the idea that you've written yourself into a corner—that you've started so many narrative threads, and created so many hundreds of characters that
 it's become overwhelming to reconcile. You've even hinted as much
 on your blog
 . If that's the case, will you let certain story lines ebb, or do you feel obligated to see them all through? 
 There's no doubt that I've wrestled with this book and the complexity and size of the series, and that may be one reason why my writing has slowed
 down. But my intent right from the beginning was to do something huge and epic, with a cast of thousands and many different settings.
 With the general construction of the books, in some ways I took the Lord of the Rings as my model. Tolkien begins very small, in the Shire with
 Bilbo's birthday party, and from there, the characters all accumulate. First there's Frodo and Sam, and they pick up Merry and Pippin, and then they
 pick up Aragorn in Bree, and they pick up the rest of the fellowship in Rivendell, but they're still altogether. But then at a certain point, they
 begin to go separate ways—Frodo and Sam cross the river, Merry and Pippin are captured by orcs, and Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas are chasing them, and
 they continue to separate. You get this sense of everyone being together, and then the world gets bigger and bigger.
 My scheme is very similar to that. We begin in Winterfell, and everyone except Daenerys is in Winterfell, even characters that don't belong there, like
 Tyrion. And they set off together and then they begin to split. In that sense my books are bigger than the Lord of the Rings because there are more
 characters and they split further apart. It has always been my intent, as with the Lord of the Rings, that eventually it would curve around and they
 would start moving back together. I think I'm reaching the turning point, that's starting to happen now.
 Maybe I did make it too big two books ago. But I've thrown the balls in the air and I feel obligated to keep on juggling them as best I can. You can't
 just forget about some of the balls, you have to deal with the plot threads that you've introduced. If I can pull it all off the way I want hopefully
 it will be great. And if I don't, I'm sure the world will let me know.
 How has your background in writing for film and television influenced the telling of the story, and your approach to ending the series? 
 Well it certainly did influence my approach to the structure of this book. One of things that you learn working in television is the act break, because
 you're trying to keep people coming back after the commercials. A one-hour script is divided into a number of acts, and you always want each to end,
 not necessarily with a cliff-hanger, but with some kind of twist or resolution or moment of discovery. It's also a fine structure for fiction. And
 after working in Hollywood I think I got to be pretty good at that and it's certainly a structure I've adopted with the chapters in Ice and Fire. I
 think it makes the fiction more page-turning. "What's going to happen next?" is a phase that I always want to hear my readers saying.
 You've mentioned feeling disappointed and betrayed by the finale of the television series Lost, which is another example of a series with a devoted
 fan community. How do you hope to avoid similar feelings toward your own resolution, when expectations are so high?
 That's the challenge, isn't it? You're probably never going to please everyone, especially when you have as many readers as I do now. And they have
 theories and desires about how they want it to end, so there will always be a few dissenters who say, oh I didn't want it to end that way, I wanted it
 to end another way.
 I was very satisfied with the end of the Lord of the Rings, let us say. Talking about predictability here—I had a sense, even as a kid, that the
 ring was going to go in the volcano. They weren't going to let Sauron take over the world. But he surprised me in that Frodo couldn't do it. Bringing
 in Gollum the way he did was an amazing part of the ending, and then came the scouring of the Shire. And when I was 13 years old, reading this, I
 didn't understand the scouring of the Shire. They won—why are there all these other pages? But I reread these books every few years, and every time my
 appreciation for what Tolkien did there grows. It was this kind of sad elegy on the price of victory. I think the scouring of the Shire is one of the
 essential parts of Tolkien's narrative now, and gives it depth and resonance, and I hope that I will be able to provide an ending that's similar to all
 of that.
 When Game of Thrones aired on HBO this past spring, there was a lot of 
 conversation
 and 
 debate
 about the depiction of sex, rape, and female agency on the show and in the books. How do you feel about the way the show handled those things in
 comparison with what you tried to do in your novels?
 My novels have quite a bit of sex in them. ... I have read some people saying that they added sex scenes, and they did. They also didn't put in some sex
 scenes that are in the book, so on balance, I think they're the same. A few things were handled differently. Obviously the way I wrote it in the book
 is the way I would have handled it.
 How do you make decisions about the depictions of sexual violence that you include in your writing? 
 Well, I'm not writing about contemporary sex—it's medieval.
 There's a more general question here that doesn't just affect sex or rape, and that's this whole issue of what is gratuitous? What should be depicted?
 I have gotten letters over the years from readers who don't like the sex, they say it's "gratuitous." I think that word gets thrown around and what it
 seems to mean is "I didn't like it." This person didn't want to read it, so it's gratuitous to that person. And if I'm guilty of having gratuitous sex,
 then I'm also guilty of having gratuitous violence, and gratuitous feasting, and gratuitous description of clothes, and gratuitous heraldry, because
 very little of this is necessary to advance the plot. But my philosophy is that plot advancement is not what the experience of reading fiction is
 about. If all we care about is advancing the plot, why read novels? We can just read Cliffs Notes.
 A novel for me is an immersive experience where I feel as if I have lived it and that I've tasted the food and experienced the sex and experienced the
 terror of battle. So I want all of the detail, all of the sensory things—whether it's a good experience, or a bad experience, I want to put the reader
 through it. To that mind, detail is necessary, showing not telling is necessary, and nothing is gratuitous.
 What is the most valid criticism that you've received? 
 I don't really have an answer to that one. There's certainly valid criticism of details. I have a horse that changes sex between the first and second
 book, for example. I do make mistakes, and I regret that because it confuses the issue. There are other so-called "mistakes" in the book that are not
 mistakes—they're very intentional because I'm trying to get at something having to do with the point of view structure and the unreliable narrator. Two
 different characters may remember an event in two different ways—well that's not a mistake, that's deliberate. When you have horses changing sex, it
 blurs the distinction and throws the reader off. So I guess that's a valid mistake.
 When can we expect The Winds of Winter,
 the next book in the series? Or have you learned never to answer questions like that?
 I have learned! I've been burned too much by that, so I'll just say... it will be done when it's done.
 Share
 Email
 Print
 Presented by 
More at The Atlantic
 'The Only Guy Willing to Take on Rupert Murdoch'
 Did the CIA Really Use Fake Vaccinations to Get Bin Laden?
 If Murdoch Steps Down, Who Will Take Over News Corporation?
 When Did the NBA Become Republican?
 Payback Time for Anti-Union Republicans in Wisconsin
 Join the Discussion
 After you comment, click Post. If you’re not already logged in you will be asked to log in or register.
 Comments powered by Disqus
 Rachael Brown's Archive
 Recent Posts
 All Entries
 Current Week
 Previous Week
 By Source
 All Sources
 Magazine Articles
 Blog Articles
 By Date
 Just In
 James Fallows12:23 AM ET
 Thirteen Ways of Looking at an Airplane
 1310617389
 Voices
 James Fallows 
 Thirteen Ways of Looking at an Airplane 
 12:23 AM ET
 Megan McArdle 
 Medicare Payment Reform: Still Acrimonious As Hell 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Ta-Nehisi Coates 
 The Playmaker Backs Gay Rights 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Jeffrey Goldberg 
 Maybe It's Time for American Jews to Boycott… 
 12:48 PM ET
 Alexis Madrigal 
 Bradley Manning, the Person: The Making of the… 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Joshua Green 
 Michele Bachmann's Church Says the Pope Is the… 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Steve Clemons 
 Obama-Biden Fundraising Juggernaut 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Derek Thompson 
 Countdown to Default: The Latest Debt-Ceiling News 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Clive Crook 
 Mitch McConnell's Good Idea 
 Jul 13, 2011
 Correspondents
 Andrew Cohen
 'Hot Coffee' and the Scalding of the American Jury
 Damien Ma
 The Meat of China's Inflation Problem
 Joshua Foust
 How Chinese Mining is Destroying Afghanistan's Historic Ruins
 View All Correspondents
Yoni AppelbaumWriter and historian
Raymond BonnerInvestigative Reporter, Foreign Correspondent
Thanassis CambanisJournalist and author
Andrew CohenLegal analyst
Mickey EdwardsFormer congressman
Garrett EppsLaw professor and journalist
Richard FloridaCreativity expert
Joshua FoustForeign affairs analyst and writer
Howard W. FrenchInternational News Analyst
Alex GibneyDocumentary filmmaker
D.B. GradyVeteran, novelist, essayist
Shadi HamidMiddle East Analyst
Ben W. Heineman Jr.Policy expert
Steven HellerDesign writer and educator
Jeff HoweJournalist and new media expert
Wendy KaminerLawyer, civil libertarian
Damien MaChina analyst
Lisa MargonelliEnergy & environment writer
Peter OsnosJournalist, publisher
Alyssa RosenbergWriter, editor, pop culture geek
Cristine RussellScience and health writer
Ellen Ruppel ShellScience journalist
David ShenkScience & culture writer
Erik TarloffNovelist, screenwriter 
Edward TennerCulture-and-tech historian
Jonathan TeppermanInternational affairs writer
Dominic TierneyInternational affairs analyst
Brian TillWriter on foreign policy
Kathleen Kennedy TownsendPolitician, writer, activist
Ford VoxPhysician and journalist
Lane WallacePilot, entrepreneur, writer
James WarrenPolitical analyst
Adam WerbachSustainability expert
Graeme WoodWriter and traveler
 The Biggest Story in Photos
 Tour de France 2011 - Part 1
 Jul. 13 2011
 what matters now in entertainment
 Rich Folks, Saggy Pants, and the Vast Manatee Conspiracy
 You Can Totally Still Catch Up on 'Breaking Bad' Before the Premiere
 U.S. Beats France 3-1, Advances to Women's World Cup Finals
 Last Update:
 6:50 PM 
 Subscribe Now
 SAVE 59%! 10 issues JUST $2.45 PER COPY
 STATE
 AK
 AL
 AR
 AZ
 CA
 CO
 CT
 DC
 DE
 FL
 GA
 HI
 IA
 ID
 IL
 IN
 KS
 KY
 LA
 MA
 MD
 ME
 MI
 MN
 MO
 MS
 MT
 NC
 ND
 NE
 NH
 NJ
 NM
 NV
 NY
 OH
 OK
 OR
 PA
 RI
 SC
 SD
 TN
 TX
 UT
 VA
 VT
 WA
 WI
 WV
 WY
 YT
 Subscribe
 Newsletters
 Sign up to receive our three free newsletters
 This Week on TheAtlantic.com (sample)
 This Month in The Atlantic (sample)
 5 Best Columns from The Atlantic Wire (sample)
 I want to receive updates from our partners and sponsors
 Submit
 Most Popular
 1
 Bernanke to Ron Paul: Gold Isn't Money
 2
 Michele Bachmann's Church Says the Pope Is the Antichrist
 3
 How to Land Your Kid in Therapy
 4
 How the 'Harry Potter' Movies Succeeded Where the Books Failed
 5
 Bradley Manning, the Person: The Making of the World's Most Notorious Leaker
 6
 Tour de France 2011
 7
 The Bowling Alley That Helped Integrate Los Angeles
 8
 7 Reasons Why Netflix's Price Hike Is a Bonehead Move
 9
 What Google's Famous Cafeterias Can Teach Us About Health
 10
 More on Rep. Cantor as Least Valuable Player
 Subscribe Help
 Faq
 Follow the Atlantic
 Masthead
 Store
 Jobs
 Educational Program
 Privacy Policy
 Site Map
 Terms & Conditions
 Advertise
 Press
 Contact Us
 Merchandise
 Special Reports
 Atlantic.Live
Copyright © 2011 by The Atlantic Monthly Group. All Rights Reserved.