A Dance with Dragons, by George R.R. Martin - CSMonitor.com
 Skip to: Content
 Skip to: Site Navigation
 Skip to: Search
 Advertisements
 Try a FREE 30 day preview of Daily News Briefing
 Search
 World
 USA
 Commentary
 Business
 Environment
 Innovation
 Science
 The Culture
 Books
 Books
 / Book Reviews
 Readers' picks
Blog: Chapter & Verse
Book Reviews
Latest News Wires
 All Books Topics   
 Readers' picksChapter & VerseBook ReviewsLatest News Wires
FREE daily e-mail
 A Dance with Dragons, by George R.R. Martin
No one – not even the most sharp-eyed of Martin readers – will be able to guess where this book is going.
 A Dance with Dragons
By George R.R. Martin
Random House
1,040 pp.
 Enlarge
 0 
-->
 By 
 Megan Wasson / 
 July 12, 2011
 A Dance with Dragons may be the newest book in George R.R. Martin’s “A Song of Ice and Fire” fantasy series, but it relies on a series of plot twists familiar to all fans of Martin’s writing. Namely, the characters you thought were crucial will be killed off and characters you thought were dead will miraculously reappear.
 Skip to next paragraph
 Buy this book from:
 Related stories
 "A Dance with Dragons" will finally appear – George R.R. Martin fans rejoice!
 "A Dance with Dragons" leaked early – and George R.R. Martin is irate
 3 George R.R. Martin books that I like better than "Game of Thrones"
 Visit book editor Marjorie Kehe's Fan page (Facebook.com) 
 Topics
 Media
 Arts, Entertainment, and Media
 Books and Literature
 Book Reviews
 The previous (and fourth) book in the series, “A Feast for Crows,” covers the same time span as does “A Dance with Dragons.” However, Martin’s trademark narrative device of choosing a set of point-of-view characters for each book and giving each of them a handful of chapters to narrate left “A Feast for Crows” in the hands of some of the series’ less interesting characters – making the book a less gripping read than most of the rest of the series.
But in “A Dance with Dragons,” Martin focuses on some of the more popular characters not heard from in “A Feast for Crows,” including Jon Snow, Daenerys Targaryen, and Tyrion Lannister. In the first chapters of the book readers get the half of the story not told in “Feast for Crows.” Then “A Dance for Dragons” takes a classic Martin twist and rejoins the two sets of characters to create some hair-raising cliffhangers for the next book.
"Game of Thrones": a quiz for experts
As with “A Feast for Crows,” “A Dance with Dragons” begins with the startling realization that the war for the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms may not really be what the series is about. While the contenders for the throne dwindle, threats of unrest spring up from beyond the Wall built to hold out the mysterious and deadly creatures of the night, and Daenerys begins to conquer cities across the narrow sea.
Diehard George R. R. Martin fans will know that his writing style tends to start slow and build to a climax, and “A Dance with Dragons” is no exception. The first few hundred pages of the almost 1,000-page tome are simply setting the stage for the action in the second half of the book. However, you’ll want to pay close attention to the first half of the book. Martin is the kind of writer who needs to be read with an “A Song of Ice and Fire” encyclopedia at hand to catch all the layered, subtle hints and details that he leaves throughout his books. If you pay attention, you will be rewarded and questions will be answered.
The dragons promised in the title do play a prominent role in the book, but they may not be as easily tamed as Daenerys might have hoped. While she attempts to hone her ability to rule and raise an army in Slaver’s Bay, chaos erupts all around her, threatening to take away everything she’s worked for.
Jon Snow struggles to hold the Night’s Watch together, but is being pulled in all directions by the demands of Stannis Baratheon, claimant to the throne; by the wildings, by his ties to his family; and by the ever-present threat of the Others.
Tyrion, ever a Lannister at heart, seeks out Daenerys to win her favor and ally himself with one of the strongest contenders for the Iron Throne, but faces significant stumbling blocks along the way.
“A Dance with Dragons” may well be one of the best books in the five-book series so far. Martin’s prose is concise but pithy, begging to be devoured over and over again. All the fans’ favorite characters make an appearance, unlike in the last book. But what truly sets this book above some of the others in the series is Martin’s ability to keep his readers on their toes and the edges of their seats. No character, no matter how likeable and seemingly important, is ever safe from Martin’s pen (remember Ned Stark?), and on the other hand, no one can ever be truly pronounced dead. What you thought was going to happen after reading Books No. 1, 2, and even 3 and 4, now clearly will not happen, and that’s where Martin’s strength lies.
Fans should and will rush to buy “A Dance with Dragons” because no one, and I mean no one – not even the most sharp-eyed of Martin readers – will be able to guess where this series is going.
And for any reader who is not yet a fan, I advise you to become one immediately. “A Dance with Dragons” is probably not the best place to start. You’ll want the background of the four earlier books to fully enjoy this one. But if you start on “A Game of Thrones” (Book No. 1) now, you should have plenty of time to savor Books 1-5 before you need to start worrying about No. 6.
Megan Wasson is a Monitor contributor. 
Join the Monitor's book discussion on Facebook and Twitter.
10 fantasy novels that would make great TV shows
 Related stories
 "A Dance with Dragons" will finally appear – George R.R. Martin fans rejoice!
 "A Dance with Dragons" leaked early – and George R.R. Martin is irate
 3 George R.R. Martin books that I like better than "Game of Thrones"
 Visit book editor Marjorie Kehe's Fan page (Facebook.com) 
 Topics
 Media
 Arts, Entertainment, and Media
 Books and Literature
 Book Reviews
-->
 Read Comments
 View reader comments | Comment on this story
 These comments are not screened before publication. Constructive debate about the above story is welcome, but personal attacks are not. Please do not post comments that are commercial in nature or that violate any copyright[s]. Comments that we regard as obscene, defamatory, or intended to incite violence will be removed. If you find a comment offensive, you may flag it.
 If you have questions about comments or comment policy, check out our FAQ page.
 When posting a comment, you agree to our Terms of Service.
 Making a Difference
 Escaping Cambodia's killing fields, she now teaches self-respect 
 Business »
 Today's consignment shop: hip and online
 The Culture »
 In China, a baby breaks the language barrier
 The Culture »
 Zookeeper: movie review
 The Culture »
 Horrible Bosses: movie review
 The Culture »
 Ham radio hangs on
 USA »
 'Transformers' vs. 'Larry Crowne': Machines trump movie stars at the metroplex
 More Books »
 Bestselling books the week of 7/14/11, according to IndieBound*
 About these ads
 -->
 Most viewed
 51st state would be a red state
 Arnold Schwarzenegger returns to the big screen in 'The Last Stand'
 Obama on debt ceiling: Is he winning over Americans?
 Murdoch biographer says hacking scandal could take down key executives 
 Why Republicans are fighting to save the 30-cent light bulb
 Photos of the day
 07.12.11 »
 CSMonitor.com on Facebook
 In Pictures
 Atlantis: The final mission
 Inside CSMonitor.com:
 Tour de France TV car crackup brings new rules, investigation [VIDEO]
Sunday's wreck caused by a French television car was the second accident involving a media car during this year's Tour de France. Now, media cars must keep their distance. 
 DC Decoder:
 To keep or ditch the vice president? That is the reelection question.
 Israel's boycott ban meets swift resistance
 Latin America Monitor:
 São Paulo and Rio vault up list of most expensive cities for expats
 Latin America Monitor:
 Venezuelan opposition's presidential primary: a step towards greater democracy?
 About these ads
 What are you reading?
Let me know about a good book you've read recently, or about the book that's currently on your bedside table. Why did you pick it up? Are you enjoying it?
 Name:
 E-mail address:
 Comments:
FREE daily e-mail newsletter
 CSMonitor.com top stories, cartoons and photos
 -->
 -->
 See sample | Privacy Policy
 What happens when ordinary people decide to pay it forward? Extraordinary change. See how individuals are making a difference... 
 Muoy You has expanded the small school she founded in her native Phnom Penh, Cambodia, after returning from exile. Her mission: to help restore the country’s professional class, ravaged by Pol Pot.
Muoy You, who escaped Cambodia's killing fields, now teaches self-respect and integrity
 Muoy You has opened Seametrey Children's Village in Phnom Penh to help restore Cambodia's culture.
 Become part of the Monitor community
 10,000 FB fans | 4,300 on Twitter | 50K Email subscribers ( sign up! )
 -->
 32K on Facebook | 11K on Twitter | 2,180 on YouTube
 -->
 -->
-->
 -->
Sponsored Links
 Booking Agency
 Grabow Entertainment Agency
Computers
 PowerEdge Memory
Fitness
 Endless Pools Swimming Machines
Legal Services
 Whistleblower
Real Estate
 International Shipping
 Mortgage Calculator
 Moving
 Moving Companies
 Real Estate
 Speakers Bureau
 Christian Speakers
 Celebrity Speakers Bureau
 Motivational Speakers Bureau
 Sports Speakers Bureaus
 Web Services
 Dedicated Servers
 Hosting
 About these ads
 Home
 About
 Content Map
 Monitor Topics
 Contact Us
 Subscribe
 E-Readers
 Text
 Specials
 Multimedia
 Make Us Your Home Page
 Careers
 Corrections
 Find us online
 Advertise With Us
 Monitor Mall
 Today's Article on Christian Science
 © The Christian Science Monitor. All Rights Reserved. Terms under which this service is provided to you. Privacy Policy.