 Back in the summer, I wrote a blog about the interesting new David Gemmell Legend Award for fantasy and asked why fantasy novels are viewed so negatively by those that don't actually read them. Hundreds of people came on to comment and as the debate proceeded it became clear that I myself actually knew next to nothing about contemporary fantasy novels. I was soon challenged to address my ignorance – and given a host of recommendations as to where I should start. I accepted the challenge and began my re-education pretty quickly, believe it or not, even though a full six months have passed since then. It's taken me all this time to write a follow-up partly because of other commitments, but mainly because I decided to read George RR Martin 's A Game Of Thrones. Which is a mighty 800 pages long. A pretty terrifying figure if you consider that this is one of the shorter entries in a projected seven-part series. Seven books that are each almost as fat as the Lord Of The Rings … … Not that this has put people off. I was convinced that I should embark on the Ice and Fire books, thanks to the many enthusiastic posts on the Gemmell blog, alongside the novels' fearsome reputation as "dragon-crack". The series' fanbase literally can't get enough of the stuff. George RR Martin hasn't finished the fifth book yet (long after original projected publication dates) and the delay is causing so much angst among readers that Martin himself has been moved to ask them to stop haranguing him , and Neil Gaiman has had to explain (to someone intent on pressing Martin for more) the important principle that " George RR Martin is not your bitch ". At first I couldn't understand this enthusiasm. The UK Voyager edition has a hideous cover with embossed letters and a horsey-looking dragon on the front. Open it up and there's the perennial fantasy cliché of a pen and ink map with funny little pictures of trees, improbable coastlines and towns with names like "Maidenpool". Within the story proper there is plenty more of that kind of thing. By the second page of the story proper, a sword is given a name (Ice, unexcitingly). There's an intensely irritating wandering minstrel (although Martin has at least given his the hilarious name Marillion ). There's a silly castle called the Eyrie high up "steps carved into a mountain" and a path "too steep even for mules" - but presumably not too steep to transport food supplies and the tonnes of lumber needed to build the place. After sex, women are left with "aching loins". There are also plenty of other frequent and heinous archaisms: "Would that I were a pumpkin" and "Lord Tywin is greatly wroth." There are other less cosmetic problems, too. Martin has a great talent when it comes to placing his reader inside the heads of his characters, and his character-per-chapter format gives an intimate and interesting perspective on his world. But the people he describes are too often one-dimensional and dull, and they exist on a simplistic George W Bush-style moral plane of black and white, good and evil. The good guys are generally insufferably good: their nobility comes attached to pomposity, preachiness and predictability. The bad guys are camp pantomine villains given over to deviant sex, the slaughter of innocents and laughing at others' pain. There's a dumb princess who thinks only of handsome princes and good manners and pink fluffy cliché. There's a court surrounding a declining king made up of consummate liars, sycophants and poisoners. There's a brattish heir to the kingdom with severe entitlement issues. It's daft. It's unsophisticated. It's cartoonish. And yet, I couldn't stop reading. And it wasn't with the kind of self-loathing desperation for closure that took me to the end of The Da Vinci Code. I read A Game Of Thrones with genuine pleasure. It may be a cartoon, but it's one that is brilliantly drawn. Archaic absurdity aside, Martin's writing is excellent. His dialogue is snappy and frequently funny. His descriptive prose is immediate and atmospheric, especially when it comes to building a sense of deliciously dark foreboding relating to a long winter that is about to engulf his fictional land. Indeed, darkness is something Martin excels in. He indulges in plenty of the pulse-quickening battlefield heroics in Tolkien's gory glory mould, but he also never fails to show the grimy reality of the slaughter. In these wars, children are killed at their mothers' breasts, the old are tortured and humiliated, women are raped, suffering is everywhere and Martin doesn't flinch in the face of it. Meanwhile, there are unsettling passages of bracingly weird sex, inventively unpleasant killing (a pot of semi-molten gold worn as a hat being a memorable example) and a strain of political intrigue (supposedly based on the Wars Of The Roses, interestingly enough) that would make Machiavelli blush. Finally, there's the simple fact of Martin's storytelling ability. Each chapter ends on an effective cliff-hanger, each one of the numerous story strands contains dozens of others and they all contribute to further pressing questions about the fate of each of his hundreds of characters … Although I cared for few of them, I had to know what happened to each. I have to know what's going to happen too. Especially since so many reviews have suggested that the simplistic morality I complain of here gets fascinatingly muddled later on. I know why they call it dragon-crack. I have no choice but to read the next novel. 