 AN Wilson's Dante in Love , wrote the Independent's Fiona Sampson , "is no set of Pass Notes. Nor is it simple literary biography. Instead, Wilson explores the motivation and thought underlying The Divine Comedy " in a study "rich in both biographical detail and political history". Praising the author's elegant prose and "writer's ear", she judged the book "not just a thoroughly readable, illuminating story" but also "a worthy vade mecum with which to explore Dante's masterpiece". Sarah Bakewell appeared equally captivated in the Sunday Times, enthusing that "this rich and nuanced new life" of the medieval poet was also a "primer for all levels" that invites us to "half-medievalise ourselves" to understand his work. "Wilson is an excellent 21st-century Virgil," she averred, "for anyone who has ever lost their way in Dante's dark wood, or has yet to venture in." Not for the first time, it was left to the Observer's Peter Conrad to jeer where others cheered. "This is less a book about Dante than an excuse for AN Wilson to vent his ideological hatreds," he warned potential purchasers, attacking the author's use of Dante as a vehicle for his "fuddy-duddy project to re-medievalise the world". Noting that this "pious polemic" was part of an eight-book contract, Conrad discerned signs of an over-heavy workload: "the book's structure is wayward, its writing sloppy . . . [and] his scholarly asides are often bizarre". Janine di Giovanni's Ghosts by Daylight , recounting her experiences after swapping war reporting for marriage and motherhood in Paris, is "a bitter and illuminating story constructed with considerable artistry", said the Times's Sara Wheeler , who however faulted the book's "journalistic prose style" and said "much of the information in these pages made me queasy", such as the detailing of the author's French photographer husband's breakdown. Marcus Berkmann , in the Spectator , had cavils too (early on, the couple seem "two of the most annoying people who have ever lived"), but eventually warmed to a writer who "reports on domestic life as though it were another war zone", finding the result "a raw, perceptive and ultimately rather enthralling book". With almost 300,000 US sales on publication day, George RR Martin's A Dance with Dragons hardly needs exultant reviews to boost its fortunes. But it received one in the New York Times , where Dana Jennings 's awestruck paean to the fifth instalment of the Song of Fire and Ice sequence had more than a hint of patriotic cheer-leading. Martin's work "has its share of flagons 'n' dragons, swords 'n' sorcerers," she declared, "but that doesn't make him the American Tolkien. He's much better than that." Jennings compared the 1,106-page book instead to the sprawling fiction of Balzac and Dickens (but "turned out in fantasy motley"); and in the (London) Times, Lisa Tuttle made a lofty parallel of her own in saying that reviewing it was "as pointless as discussing a single chapter of War and Peace out of context" and extolled Martin as someone who "has not only raised the bar for writers of epic fantasy but pushed and stretched the boundaries of the novel itself". 