George R. R. Martin and the Rise of Fantasy - NYTimes.com
 Log In
 Register Now
Help
Home Page
Today's Paper
Video
Most Popular
Times Topics
Search All NYTimes.com
Sunday Book Review
World
U.S.
N.Y. / Region
Business
Technology
Science
Health
Sports
Opinion
Arts
Art & Design
BooksSunday Book Review
Best Sellers
Dance
Movies
Music
Television
Theater
Video Games
Style
Travel
Jobs
Real Estate
Autos
Essay
Dragons Ascendant: George R. R. Martin and the Rise of Fantasy
 By DAVID ORR
Published: August 12, 2011 
Sign In to E-Mail
Print
 Single Page
Reprints
It’s a high time for high fantasy. Novels about wizards outsell (and often outshine) the most glittering literary fiction titles; the contemporary romantic hero generally sports a pair of fangs; and even now the five remaining earthlings who haven’t read “The Lord of the Rings” are being hunted down and put to the sword. Yet for all of fantasy’s successes, there remains a chip on the spaulder of the genre. As Michael Agger put it in 2009, reviewing Lev Grossman’s Harry Potter-­influenced novel “The Magicians”: “Perhaps a fantasy novel meant for adults can’t help being a strange mess of effects. . . . Sounds like fun, but aren’t we a little old for this?” And with that, hundreds of years of fantastical writing are reduced to 20-­sided dice, pencil nubs, half-filled Coke cans and the crushing realization that no, your elven rogue’s dagger is not going to be effective against green slime. 
Enlarge This Image
Helen Sloan/HBO
Peter Dinklage in the HBO series "Game of Thrones." 
Related
Books of The Times: ‘A Dance With Dragons’ by George R. R. Martin
(July 15, 2011)
A Fantasy Book Revives Store Sales
(July 14, 2011)
There are reasons to think this view of fantasy is needlessly limited, and one of the most obvious is the titanic success of George R. R. Martin, the present and future king of The New York Times best-­seller list. Martin’s immensely popular new book, “A Dance With Dragons,” follows “A Feast for Crows,” which in turn followed “A Storm of Swords,” “A Clash of Kings” and “A Game of Thrones” (even if you admire these books, as I do, it’s hard to argue that Martin has A Knack for Titles). Thus far, the series has included a boy being thrown off a balcony, a woman having her face bitten off, a man having his nose cut off, a girl having her ear sliced off, multiple rapes, multiple massacres, multiple snarfings of people by animals, multiple beheadings and multiple discussions of revenue streams in medieval economies. If kids are reading this stuff, God help their parents. 
Martin’s books are essentially the War of the Roses with magic, set largely in a land called Westeros. They are written in the third person, but each chapter takes the point of view of a single character, with several characters recurring throughout. Of particular importance are noble families like the Starks (good guys), the Targaryens (at least one good guy, or girl), the Lannisters (conniving), the Greyjoys (mostly conniving), the Baratheons (mixed bag), the Tyrells (unclear) and the Martells (ditto), most of whom are feverishly endeavoring to advance their ambitions and ruin their enemies, preferably unto death. But as we discover, these people should be paying less attention to their own squabbling and more attention to the nearly deserted northern reaches of the kingdom. Because beyond “The Wall,” the giant construction of ice and stone that marks Westeros’s border, a race of creatures called “the Others” is preparing to . . . well, it’s not clear yet, but it seems to involve turning people into zombies, which is almost worse than turning them into Lannisters. 
Martin possesses two virtues in abundance. First, he’s unapologetically coldblooded. Westeros is a dangerous place governed by the whims of men, not the rule of law, and the first novel in his series is famous for (spoilers follow!) dispatching a thoroughly admirable major character with whom readers have been identifying for most of the book. The killing is shocking, and it’s done on the impulse of a temporarily empowered child. (The same child is poisoned two books later, so hey, all’s well that ends well.) This tendency is less in evidence in “A Dance With Dragons” — in fact, some characters are beginning to seem charmed — but at least one moment in the book will have readers saying, “No way did that just happen.” 
Martin’s second virtue is a nearly supernatural gift for storytelling. All of his hundreds of characters have grace notes of history and personality that advance a plot line. Every town has an elaborately recalled series of triumphs and troubles. Moreover, historical asides are inseparable from the books’ larger narratives, so as you’re propelled through the story, the sensation is like riding a wave that’s somehow moving away from shore, with the water beneath you growing deeper and more shadowed as your speed increases. 
Martin’s finest creations thus far are Tyrion Lannister, Jon Snow and Daenerys Targaryen. Tyrion is a dwarf (a human dwarf, not a Tolkien dwarf), a cynic, a drinker, an outcast and conspicuously the novels’ most intelligent presence. Martin is probably a little too fond of him. Jon Snow is presented as the illegitimate son of the Stark patriarch, although it’s uncertain whether Stark is indeed his father. Jon is a complex, thoughtful and basically good character who leads the Night’s Watch, the garrison of former criminals and landless sons that guards the Wall and that has been reduced to a fraction of its needed strength. Jon’s leadership is the best hope of Westeros, so naturally he’s in imminent danger throughout “A Dance With Dragons.” As is Daenerys Targaryen, the former king’s youngest daughter, who has spent the previous four books in southern kingdoms raising armies to invade Westeros, but who is now slightly sidetracked by her desire to destroy the slave trade. Also, the titular dragons are hers. They turn out to be problematic. 
 1 
 2 
Next Page »
David Orr writes the On Poetry column for the Book Review and is the author of “Beautiful and Pointless.”
A version of this article appeared in print on August 14, 2011, on page BR31 of the Sunday Book Review with the headline: Dragons Ascendant.
Sign In to E-Mail
Print
 Single Page
Reprints
 Get 50% Off The New York Times & Free All Digital Access.
Get Free E-mail Alerts on These Topics
Books and Literature
Martin, George R R
 Another bitter divorce for Perelman 
 ALSO IN BUSINESS »
 In Tech, starting up by failing 
 For Super Bowl XLVI, a bigger batch of first-time advertisers 
Advertisements 
Help New Yorkers in need.
Donate Today.
 Inside NYTimes.com 
 Books »
 Hail Social Climbers, for Edith Wharton’s Birthday
 N.Y. / Region »
 $204 and Red Tape Help in a Family Emergency
 Theater »
 Symbiotic Bond for Stage and Screen Versions
 Opinion »
 Is the G.O.P. Good for South Carolinians?
 The state tends to go red, and Room for Debate explores why. Would Democrats better serve the poor and retired residents?
 Magazine »
 Cynthia Nixon’s Life After ‘Sex’
 Opinion »
 Op-Ed: Who Owns My Ticket?
 Ticketmaster’s new approach to sales restricts basic consumer freedoms.
 Movies »
 Steven Soderbergh’s ‘Haywire’
 Travel »
 36 Hours: Hamburg, Germany
 Opinion »
 Campaign Stops: There They Go Again
 Christian conservatives like the myth of President Reagan, but in reality they were often dissatisfied with his presidency.
 Real Estate »
 The Hunt: Time to Stay Put
 Opinion »
 Op-Ed: Lechery and the Talmud
 Sports »
 Tom Coughlin and Giants Losing Replay Challenges
Home
World
U.S.
N.Y. / Region
Business
Technology
Science
Health
Sports
Opinion
Arts
Style
Travel
Jobs
Real Estate
Autos
Site Map
© 2011 The New York Times Company
Privacy
Your Ad Choices
Terms of Service
Terms of Sale
Corrections
RSS
Help
Contact Us
Work for Us
Advertise