‘A Dance with Dragons’ worth the long long wait - Washington Post
 Real Estate
 Rentals
 Cars
 Today's Paper
 Going Out Guide
 Find&Save
 Service Alley
 Home 
 PostTV
 In PostTV
 Politics
 In Politics
 Congress
 Courts & Law
 The Fed Page
 Health Care
 Polling
 White House
 GovBeat
 Md. Politics
 Va. Politics
 D.C. Politics
 Blogs & Columns
 Lindsey Graham renews vow to block nominees
 Post Politics
 | Holly Yeager 
 Why Chuck backed Hillary. And why now.
 The Fix
 | Chris Cillizza and Sean Sullivan 
 Gay rights in Congress: public opinion and (mis)representation
 The Monkey Cage
 | Jeff Lax and Justin Phillips 
 How New Mexico reduced its pension liability by $1.5 billion in a year
 GovBeat
 | Niraj Chokshi 
 TSA to examaine policies after LAX shooting
 The Federal Eye
 | Josh Hicks 
 Opinions
 In Opinions
 Toles Cartoons
 Telnaes Animations
 The Post's View
 Left-Leaning
 Right-Leaning
 Local Opinions
 Columnist Index
 Featured Blogs
 So, ‘Ender’s Game’ is out. Do you see it?
 ComPost
 | Alexandra Petri 
 Sunday Open Thread
 The Plum Line
 | Greg Sargent 
 A ‘lone wolf’ at LAX
 PostPartisan
 | Jonathan Capehart 
 Morning Bits
 Right Turn
 | Jennifer Rubin 
 Local
 In Local
 D.C.
 Maryland
 Virginia
 Crime
 Education
 Obituaries
 Transportation
 Weather
 Blogs & Columns
 Blogs & Columns
 A chilled beginning, but not bad November week overall
 Capital Weather Gang
 | Jason Samenow 
 Free and Easy: Photographer Mary Ellen, M. Night Shyamalan
 Going Out Guide
 | Macy Freeman 
 DCA, IAD increase security following airport shooting in LA
 Dr. Gridlock
 | Lori Aratani 
 Sports
 In Sports
 Redskins/NFL
 Capitals/NHL
 Wizards/NBA
 Nationals/MLB
 D.C.
 United/Soccer
 Colleges
 AllMetSports
 Blogs & Columns
 Forums
 Other
 Sports
 Blogs & Columns
 Caps need more offense from defense
 Capitals Insider
 | Barry Svrluga 
 Why RGIII went flying
 DC Sports Bog
 | Dan Steinberg 
 Five observations from Sunday’s victory
 The Insider
 | Mike Jones 
 Brian Goodwin named an Arizona Fall League all-star
 Nationals Journal
 | James Wagner 
 National
 In National
 Energy &
 Environment
 Health & Science
 Education
 National Security
 Investigations
 Innovations
 Know More
 On Faith
 On Leadership
 On Giving
 Corrections
 Blogs & Columns
 Mentoring young fed workers
 On Leadership
 | Tom Fox 
 Solar-powered computers, lasers on drones and more
 Innovations
 | Matt McFarland 
 Survey: 18 percent of Americans say they have seen a ghost
 On Faith
 | Georgetown/ On Faith 
 Kerry Washington couldn’t fix weak writing on SNL
 She The People
 | Soraya Nadia McDonald 
 World
 In World
 Africa
 The
 Americas
 Asia &
 Pacific
 Europe
 Middle East
 National Security
 War Zones
 Special Reports
 Columns & Blogs
 Blogs & Columns
 A report card for post-withdrawal Iraq
 WorldViews
 | Max Fisher 
 Anti-NSA backlash could fracture the Web
 WorldViews
 | Max Fisher 
 Pro-Israel groups rated as not powerful
 WorldViews
 | Max Fisher 
 China’s badly forged photos
 WorldViews
 | Max Fisher 
 Business
 In Business
 Economy
 Industries
 Local Business
 Markets
 Policy
 &
 Regulation
 Know More
 World
 Business
 Capital Business
 On Small Business
 On I.T.
 Blogs & Columns
 The truth about paying the Medicare Part D penalty
 The Color of Money
 | Michelle Singletary 
 Delaware’s governor on bringing jobs back
 Wonkblog
 | Lydia DePillis 
 Tech
 In Technology
 Innovation
 Green
 Technology
 The Switch
 Photo
 Galleries
 Blogs & Columns
 BBM for iPhone and Android arrives
 Hayley Tsukayama 
 Switch readers: Just because you can, doesn’t mean you should. 
 The Switch
 | Andrea Peterson 
 How social media killed iGoogle
 The Switch
 | Andrea Peterson 
 Sooner or later, your wireless company will become just another ISP
 The Switch
 | Brian Fung 
 Lifestyle
 In Lifestyle
 Advice
 Carolyn Hax
 Food
 Express
 Home & Garden
 Style
 Travel
 Weddings
 Wellness
 Magazine
 KidsPost
 On Parenting
 Blogs & Columns
 Artist Alex Rivera on the Washington Post review of ‘Our America’
 The Style Blog
 | Philip Kennicott 
 Kanye West, Kim Kardashian sue YouTube founder for leaked proposal footage
 The Reliable Source
 | The Reliable Source 
 Entertainment
 In Entertainment
 Books
 Comics
 Going Out Guide
 Horoscopes
 Movies
 Museums
 Music
 Puzzles & Games
 Theater &
 Dance
 TV
 Blogs & Columns
 ‘Steven Universe’: Q&A with artist that inspired new show
 Comic Riffs
 | Michael Cavna 
 Free and Easy: Photographer Mary Ellen, M. Night Shyamalan
 Going Out Guide
 | Macy Freeman 
 Jobs
 In Jobs
 More
 Classifieds
 Cars
 Deals
 Real Estate
 Rentals
 Photos
 Blogs
 Discussions
 Find&Save
 Obituaries
 Archives
 Topics
 WP Wine Club
 Service Alley
 Books
 Home>Collections
‘A Dance with Dragons’ worth the long long wait
By Bill Sheehan,July 12, 2011
"A Dance with Dragons: A Song of Ice and Fire: Book Five" by George… (Bantam Books/ )
By any measure, George R.R. Martin’s “A Dance With Dragons” is one of the Big Books of the summer, and it comes to us trailing a host of outsize expectations.
This massive fantasy is the fifth installment in a projected seven-volume epic titled “A Song of Ice and Fire.” The popularity of the series — powerfully augmented by the recent HBO adaptation of the opening volume, “A Game of Thrones” — has increased exponentially from one book to the next. It’s safe to say that no work of fantasy has generated such anticipation since Harry Potter’s final duel with Voldemort. Adding to the pre-publication furor is the fact that the most recent entry, “A Feast for Crows,” appeared way back in 2005. This gap has fueled a flood of carping and sometimes vicious Internet commentary from an assortment of disgruntled readers.
Well, those impatient souls can finally take a breath. “A Dance With Dragons,” all 1,000 pages of it, is now in bookstores, nearly six years after its predecessor. And it was worth the wait.
The “Song of Ice and Fire” series is a hugely expansive narrative set in a variety of physical locales and told through an array of constantly shifting perspectives. The principal setting for all five novels is the continent of Westeros, home to a group of formerly independent realms that have coalesced into a loosely united entity called the Seven Kingdoms. To the east, across the Narrow Sea, lie a variety of colorful desert cultures featuring, among other elements, a thriving slave trade. To the north, a vast wall 700feet high separates the Kingdoms from a haunted, impenetrable forest and from the various terrors, human and Other, that live within it. A prominent feature of life in the Kingdoms is the protracted nature of the seasons, which can last for years at a time. As the narrative begins, a long, deceptively peaceful summer is coming to an end. And, as the characters repeatedly remind us, “Winter is coming.”
The plots and counterplots that drive this mammoth enterprise take place against a complex backdrop of history, legend and myth. The most recent and relevant historical drama concerns Robert Baratheon’s revolt against the mad King Aerys Targaryen. After successfully deposing the king and scattering or killing most of the Targaryen family, Robert ascends the Iron Throne and finds, as so many kings before him, that power exacts a very steep price. Dissolute and increasingly uninterested in the practical difficulties of running a kingdom, Robert commissions the only man he can trust — Eddard Stark, Lord of Winterfell — to serve as “Hand of the King,” setting in motion a chain of events with enormous and tragic consequences.
As readers (and viewers) of “A Game of Thrones” already know, Robert dies in what may or may not be a hunting accident, paving the way for a power struggle that forms the centerpiece of the series. A handful of contenders stake their claims to the Iron Throne, throwing the realm into chaos and affecting the lives of every major character in this densely populated saga. And there really are a staggering number of characters, many of whom disappear from view for long stretches.
“A Dance With Dragons” brings back several prominent figures who have not been seen directly since “A Storm of Swords” appeared in 2000. The most welcome of these is Tyrion Lannister, the sardonic dwarf who is perhaps Martin’s most vivid creation. Following a notorious act of parricide, Tyrion flees the Seven Kingdoms and travels to the east, where he hopes to offer his services to the exiled Daenerys Targaryen. Daenerys, sole surviving descendant of the deposed King Aerys and legitimate contender for the Iron Throne, currently holds court in the remote kingdom of Meereen, surrounded by enemies and accompanied by a trio of dragons.
Other returning figures include Jon Snow, illegitimate son of Eddard Stark and newly appointed commander of the Night’s Watch, which guards the Northern Wall; the devious and beleaguered Cersei, widow of King Robert; the dour, humorless Stannis Baratheon, Robert’s brother and self-proclaimed heir; and literally dozens of others. All of them play their large and small roles in the ongoing game of thrones. And all of them are vulnerable. Any player, however important, can be removed from the board at any moment. This simple fact lends a welcome sense of uncertainty to the proceedings and helps keep the level of suspense consistently high throughout.
Filled with vividly rendered set pieces, unexpected turnings, assorted cliffhangers and moments of appalling cruelty, “A Dance With Dragons” is epic fantasy as it should be written: passionate, compelling, convincingly detailed and thoroughly imagined. Despite a number of overtly fantastic elements (dragons, seers, shape shifters and sorcerers), the book — and the series as a whole — feels grounded in the brutal reality of medieval times and has more in common with the Wars of the Roses than it does with “The Lord of the Rings.” The result is a complex summer blockbuster with brains and heart, a book with rare — and potentially enormous — appeal.
Sheehan is the author of “At the Foot of the Story Tree: An Inquiry Into the Fiction of Peter Straub.”
 Personal Post
 Email
 Tumblr
 Reddit
 Stumbleupon
 Digg
 Delicious
FEATURED ARTICLES
World’s Best Lasagna tops AllRecipes list for more than a decade
Fall TV 2013: Reviews of all the new shows
The Lumineers: More boring than rousing
More:
‘Breaking Bad’ finale: What happened to Walt — and to us
Russia anti-gay law casts a shadow over Sochi’s 2014 Olympics
Obama urges nation to demand a ‘common sense’ balance on gun control, gun rights
The Secret to Cleaning Grout in Tile Floors
In Peter Graham’s ‘Anne Perry and the Murder of the Century,’ an engrossing, disturbing tale
Five myths about J. Edgar Hoover
 Loading...
 Comments
We Recommend
It’s a jungle out there: ABC is moving Kimmel to 11:35...
August 22, 2012
Skin is wearing thin on HBO’s ‘Game of Thrones’
April 26, 2012
Hugh Thomas’s “The Golden Empire: Spain, Charles V, and...
August 11, 2011
 washingtonpost.com
© 2013 The Washington Post
Terms of Service
Privacy Policy
Submissings and Discussion Policy
Ad Choices
Index by Date
Index by Keyword