The Rhetoric of an Impossible
Object: Gods, Chems, and Science
Fantasy in Gene Wolfe's
Book of the Long Sun
JOHN GERLACH
• Robert Scholes has called science fantasy an "oxymoronic monster" (4)—as
he has said of a blurb about a previous tetralogy of Wolfe's, "Science fiction is
described as hard and sharp—in contrast with the soft and shapeless lyric ex-
travagance of fantasy. Science fantasy, is then, by definition an impossible ob-
ject, hard and soft, pointed and uncircumscribed: a monstrosity" (5), But by the
end of the essay Scholes concedes that the "oxymoronic structure" of science
fantasy "does convey something important about this new and extremely inter-
esting fictional development" (18), Just how interesting, we can see in Wolfe's
latest tetralogy, the Book ofthe Long Sun.
It's easy enough to define the individual components of this mixed genre: as
one commentator on speculative fiction has fancifully noted, "spaceships, ro-
bots, or rivets mean science fiction; a quaint village, an old man with a very
long white beard, or a sword held by a mostly naked person mean fantasy"
(McClintock
 26), Wolfe's own definition ofthe components is handy, too: "Sci-
ence fiction is what you can make people believe; fantasy is what people have to
suspend disbelief for" (Baber i). But how then, as Scholes has pointed out, can
something be both science and fantasy? In an excellent essay on science fan-
tasy, Brian Attebery sidesteps the problem by concentrating on what the authors
actually do. He notes that the genre tends to be very ad hoc—writers, as Roger
Zelazny also argues in an article m Intersections, mix and match the science and
the fantasy freely according to need. Furthermore, the writer may willfully ignore
Extrapolation, Vol, 40, No, 2 © 1999 by The Kent State University Press
John Gerlach
any specific considerations of genre. As Wolfe himself has said, "I'm not trying
to write genres, I'm trying to write a book" (Baber 3).
Critics of course enjoy occupying themselves with what fiction writers prefer
to do intuitively. Critics such as Gary Wolfe and John Clute treat science fantasy
as a branch of fantasy—specifically, they would probably consider  The Long
Sun a "rationalized fantasy." In Gary Wolfe's terms, science fantasy "refers to a
genre in which devices of fantasy are employed in a 'science-fictional' context"
(107); the Clute/Grant Encyclopedia of Fantasy contends science fantasy in-
vokes "historical or scientific explanations for happenings that seem magical."
Perhaps most significantly
 ihe, Encyclopedia does not list science fantasy as one
of the terms within the umbrella category, the FANTASTIC (which includes FAN-
TASY, SCIENCE FICTION, MAGIC REALISM, FABULATION, and SURREALISM).' I be-
lieve that the Encyclopedia'^ omission is appropriate because science fantasy
isn't truly a subgenre but instead is an inherently unstable isotope whose slow
decay produces the special effect that makes it distinctive.
Science fantasy, in other words, is inherently unstable; based on the clues
given in the individual work, the reader is likely to subsume the fantasy into the
science, or the science into the fantasy. In the case of the Long Sun, readers are
at the beginning most likely to explain the fantasy in terms of science, but they
will ultimately be unable to do so completely, and that inability will produce
some of the book's most memorable effects. The instability of the mixture, I
will argue, is essential for the effects this strange compound produces.
The problem of mixed genres immediately affects the reader's attempt to
understand a novel's setting. The question of how to interpret the setting is basic
to reading any fiction, and particularly important in fantasy, science fiction, or
the blend of the two. Starting Nightside the Long Sun, the first volume of the
series, a reader attentive to Wolfe's title might look for references to the sun as
clues to the nature of
 this fictional world, and at first the evidence is ambiguous.
One phrase notes that "sun's golden road across the sky was markedly narrower
already" (1:23).^ Does the sun create an imaginary golden road in its path, as
our sun does, or is the sun constantly a golden road—a long sun? Terms like
"shadeup" and "shadedown" are different, too. Are they just terms different
from our "sunrise" and "sunset," or signals that the sun's not like ours?
The reader will be probing a good deal more than the image ofthe sun. From
the first chapter of Nightside we know we're confronting a world of contradic-
tions: "A black civilian floater was roaring down Sun Street, scattering men and
women on foot and dodging ramshackle carts and patient gray donkeys, its
blowers raising a choking cloud of hot yellow dust" (1:17). In addition to the
contrast of the high-tech floaters and the no-tech donkeys of that passage, the
reader will discover augurs sacrificing animals to gods who seem something
from the Greco-Roman pantheon (later on one of the gods, not one of the origi-
nal nine, will be named Kypris, an appellation associated with
 Aphrodite). Words
154
Wolfe's Book of the Long Sun
we're familiar with are applied in unusual, usually comical ways. "Mainframe"
seems to be the place you go when you die—this mythological world of fantasy
is strangely technological. The gods once appeared on Sacred Windows in the
manteions (the places of worship), and sacred cables run from these windows.
The gods depend, we suspect, on rather ancient technology—cathode ray ter-
minals that can be wheeled into the street, though it takes a dozen men to do so
(3:112)—really Big Screen TV. in service of a national religion.
Most readers will resolve the instability of science and fantasy by developing
a rational explanation, first by hypothesizing that this "whorl," as it's called,
with its cities visible above in the night sky, is some sort of space ark (genera-
tion starship) illuminated with t;he futuristic equivalent of a huge fluorescent
light
 bulb. The reader in effect subsumes the fantasy into a science fiction con-
figuration. By the time the reader learns in Exodus from the Long Sun that the
whorl was dug out from a "big hunk of rock" (4:155) the reader is likely to have
surmised that this space ark is perhaps a hollowed-out asteroid, given a spin, a
"whorl," to create the appropriate level of gravity, after the fashion ofthe spin-
ning torus colonies that have proliferated as a trope in science fiction. Further-
more, readers are likely to continue this assimilation by positing the gods as
humanly controlled myth—after
 all. Enlightenment thinkers and Marxists long
ago told us that religion is used to manipulate the masses. These gods seem to
be human attempts to solidify through ideology, as contemporary thinkers would
tell us, the prevailing power structure, which is controlled in this tetralogy by
"Mainframe." If the technological explanation were fully satisfying. The Long
Sun would be a "rationalized fantasy."
My brief account of how a reader might analyze this opposition of science
fiction and fantasy, however, necessarily distorts the actual experience of read-
ing the four volumes that constitute The Book ofthe Long Sun. Although ques-
tions about this world this may predominate early, clues are so sparse the reader
will focus elsewhere. Most of
 us focus on the plot, as we follow the protagonist,
Patera Silk, in his quest to respond to the initial charge of a different god, the
Outsider, not one among the nine. As instructed by tbe Outsider, Silk strives to
save his manteion, located in a poor neighborhood, and it is at risk of being
sold. Furthermore, the world we're immersed in is one we begin to inhabit much
as the characters
 do. This world is dense and intricate, rich in detail, with recur-
ring street names, new weapons—a needier, for instance, tbe equivalent of  a .22
pistol. For the characters this whorl is the only world they know. The reader's
angle is only slightly different, and only occasionally is a clue given to invoke
again the issue of who the gods are or where this world is. Surely, most readers
would assume, we will eventually find out who's manipulating these gods, these
T.V. screens, and for what purpose, and the assumption that such gods will be
rationally explained is likely to persist through all four volumes. Ultimately,
however, Wolfe uses the instability of science fantasy as a genre for unique
155
John Gerlach
twists. We could see how by analyzing a number of different strands, but I will
focus first on the gods themselves and then on taluses and chems—mechanical
people—to observe how science fantasy works.
The gods of this book, creatures of the fantasy half of the genre, have a cer-
tain power and authority. We can "believe" in them. They have not appeared for
over thirty years, but they are beginning to appear again—twelve theophanies
on sacred windows over the four volumes of the Long Sun, in addition to seven
possessions (Turner, intemet). The theophanies have a certain majesty, given
the swirling hues that announce them on the sacred windows and the magical
conditions under which the gods can be heard—only those without sexual rela-
tions, with a few exceptions, can understand the message—hence a celibate
clergy is needed to interpret what others can see and only partially hear. Gener-
ally in the course of
 the theophanies those rules seem to hold, and the condition
of celibacy itself hardly seems something accessible to technological manipula-
tion. And the gods deliver traditional messages—Echidna appears to demand that
the city of Viron retum to worship of her daughter, Scylla, who in tum appears
to demand the overthrow of the current rulers of the Ayuntamiento (the ruling
body of the city) and the restoration the city's charter, as well as the release of
prisoners,
 A god insisting on her power and rights, her tradition and appropriate
worship, matches the way we expect gods, including the God of the Old Testa-
ment, to behave.
Scenes in which a god appears are strong scenes, climactic scenes, and their
strength and violence are not easily explained away, Maytera Marble, seem-
ingly possessed by Echidna, interrupts Musk's assassination plot at a ceremony
and holds him at the flaming altar, buming him as a sacrifice, as Echnidna's
familiars—vipers—appear.
 As elements of fantasy and myth reenacted, theophanies
are powerful experiences. Curiously enough, Wolfe has even argued in an inter-
view that "the gods of paganism were real," meaning that they were real pow-
ers, but not worthy of worship—one instance where Wolfe, a Catholic, confessed
he "split off from conventional Catholic thinking" (Jordan io).
Strong, however, as these fantasy elements are, the gods are clearly computer
beings. The goddess Kypris, possessing the human character Chenille, uses terms
like "copy" and "erase" to explain how parts of the gods can be put in people, all
under the control of the gods at Mainframe (3:107-9), And these are gods that
can die. As Chenille (then possessed by Scylla) reveals, the god Pas, the father
of the gods, has long been dead: "We wiped him out of core thirty years ago"
(2:262), As another god, Tartaros, explains to Auk in the tunnel, "The faces we
had as mortals have rotted to dust, and the voices we once possessed have been
still for a thousand years. No augur, no sibyl in the Whorl, has ever seen or
heard them. What your augurs and sibyls see, if they see anything, is the self-
image ofthe god who chooses to be seen" (3:231),
These gods are representations of a human family, and very much a family of
squabblers, Kypris, who is not one of the daughters of Pas, but rather his lover,
156
Wolfe's Book of the Long Sun
is particularly jealous ofthe rest, commenting on "homely little Scylla, with her
father's temperament and her mother's intellect" and on Pas, who wanted to wipe
Echidna out of core (4:189-90) once he felt she would try the same on him.
What Wolfe can do with the ambiguity of the gods, what kind of storytelling
energy he can derive from that, we can best see in one particular theophany. At
one point the goddess Scylla has possessed Chenille—a large raspberry-haired
tart from Orchid's brothel—who maintains her normal appearance, which in her
case is naked (satisfying one of McClintock's descriptors for fantasy!), while the
group remains on
 a joumey. The "Daddy" the goddess speaking through Che-
nille refers to in what follows is Pas, the father of the gods. As the group passes
glowing windows of cookshops and taverns . . . late diners bound for rented beds
stared rudely at Chenille's nakedness, or resolutely did not stare. "Six children after
me! Daddy had this thing about a male heir, and this other thing about not dying." A
drunken carter tried to tweak her nipple; she gouged his eyes with both thumbs and
left him keening in the gutter. "Molpe was just another girl, but you would have
thought Tartaros would do it. Oh, no. So along came little Hierax, but even Hierax
wasn't enough. So then three more girls, and after that—I suppose you already knew
we could take you over like this?" (2:261-62)
Patera Silk, whom Chenille/Scylla is addressing, does not question whether
the Chenille he knows could be possessed; his concems about the nature of his
world are not those of the reader. He does not, as does the drunken carter, try to
take advantage of the opportunity of Chenille's nakedness; instead he accepts
the concept of a god talking to him, because he has been raised to know the
world as one that these gods rule. If we are inclined to look down on Silk be-
cause he's hoodwinked by these "gods," we are also likely to look up to him as
considerably more noble than the drunken carter. The reader
 is constantly tricked
into accepting Silk's position, believing these things are "actually happening,"
because that's how everyone within the novel sees them. Yet at another level the
reader's response is tinged with the humor of knowing that a theophany such as
this cannot be exactly as Silk sees it. In that sense the continual instability ofthe
genre, our continuing tendency to be pulled in imaginatively to something we
rationally know can't be so, is interesting to the reader scene by scene, moment
by moment. In terms of the Encyclopedia of
 Fantasy, then, science fantasy does
what's central to all forms of fantasy—it modifies our  PERCEPTION.
At the same time readers may enjoy local effects, larger questions remain.
We would most clearly be able to confirm the assumption that through science,
human manipulation and not the "real gods" of fantasy rule, if we could under-
stand how the inhabitants are being led into an Exodus, and where they are
going, in the final volume. We know that Pas, or something manipulating his
image, even though it has supposedly been erased, is guiding the Exodus; but
only a few inhabitants escape at the end, and more questions emerge—is Patera
Quetzal, who seems to be gaining influence, in fact an inhumi, a vampire-like
157
John Gerlach
fantasy creature from of a type imagined in other fictions by Wolfe, and can he
control the Exodus? Or is Typhon, a godlike character from the previous tetral-
ogy. The Book ofthe New Sun, the reality behind Pas? Ultimately Wolfe seems
to be locating the whorl not in our world but in his previous fictions, endlessly
deferring the questions of what is figure, what is ground, what is science, and
what is fantasy.
Even more significantly, the motif of the Outsider, present but submerged
from the beginning, ultimately destabilizes even the assumption that we can
locate the whorl within Wolfe's previous fiction or that science can be used to
ground our conception of the whorl. Initially the Outsider is a very minor pres-
ence, appearing only three times, none on sacred windows. How this god relates
to Pas and the others is a continual problem for Silk. He knows of selected
references to the Outsider in the Chrasmologic Writings, which are treated as a
kind of sacred scripture. But this god, the one who appeard to Silk as he played
ball on a court witb his pupils, the god who had "always been behind [Silk] and
standing (as it were) at both his shoulders had, after so many years of pregnant
silence, begun to whisper into both his ears," tbis god who, after he is known,
"nothing could ever be tbe same," is a driving force for Silk, a force that will
make him question wbat kind of world be does live in (i :9).
An entirely rational, scientific explanation of Silk's perception of tbe Out-
sider is offered—Dr. Crane discounts the experience, in a sense repeating the
original tendency of the reader to imagine fantasy in the context of science:
"'You had a cerebral accident, that's all. Most likely a tiny vein burst as a result
of your exertions during the game. When that happens in the right spot, delu-
sions like yours aren't at all
 uncommon. Wemicke's area, it's called.' He touched
his own bead to indicate the place" (2:280). The text encourages the reader to
develop hypotheses about who the Outsider is from minimal clues, going be-
yond Dr. Crane's skepticism. The Outsider, we leam, made men and women of
mud "according to one somewhat doubtful passage in tbe Writings" (2:101). In
another passage Silk further explains the vision the Outsider first gave him on the
ball court: "There was a naked criminal on a scaffold, and we came back to that
when he died, and again when bis body was taken down. His mother was watch-
ing with a group of
 his friends, and when someone said he had incited sedition,
she said that she didn't think he had ever been really bad, and tbat she would
always love him" (2:273). What Silk is hearing is scripture from our world,
skewed. We recognize Mary's response to the crucifixion, Mary who like any
loving mother of
 a son accused of crime, believes He wasn't a bad boy after all.
One way to understand the Outsider is to focus on the effect he has on Silk.
The Outsider does not possess Patera Silk as Kypris possesses Chenille; the
Outsider enlightens
 Silk. And it is this enlightened Silk who shows patience and
understanding to the frightful yet piteous Mucor, the girl at times chained by
her father. Blood, to control her eerie power of possession of others that seems
to have none ofthe copy/erase technology associated with Pas or the other gods.
158
Wolfe's Book of the Long Sun
It is due to the Outsider that Silk, in dealing with the Ayuntamiento, surrenders
in order to achieve peace, in Christ-like manner overcoming opposition by re-
nunciation. Ironically his moral behavior bas grown from tbe obedience re-
quired of augurs in the Chrasmologic writings, obedience that is possibly a
form of manipulation; but Patera Silk can apply tbat morality beyond anything
"Mainframe" might dictate. He is far beyond manipulative augury and beyond
the cynicism of such as Quetzal, who knows Pas is dead—the priest who knows
God is Dead theology—but who conceals that knowledge merely to keep the
morals of the inhabitants of the whorl in place.
At the same time the Outsider is gradually revealing himself to Silk, Wolfe
gradually reveals the Outsider to the reader. Crane once refers to the Outsider as
a "minor god" (2:275), but perhaps the most delicious irony of all is in the
preface, entitled "God, Persons, and Animals Mentioned in the Text," placed
before volume 2, where the Outsider is described as "the minor God who en-
lightened Silk"; subsequent volumes offer a truer picture—in the preface to
volume
 3 the Outsider becomes "the god ofthe broken and the disparaged whose
realm lies outside the Whorl," and by volume 4, simply and most accurately
"the god of gods."
The ultimate instability, the ultimate shift in figure-ground relationships, tums
out not to be between science fiction and fantasy at all but between fiction and
theology. That shift is not a necessary product of science fantasy—science fan-
tasy need not devolve into metafiction or theology. But the fluidity of bound-
aries of interpretation and the need for reversal due to the instability of science
fantasy easily allows Wolfe his major surprise: tbe Outsider is the God of our
world. Readers, instead of finding themselves coping with tbe impossible ob-
ject of
 a mixed genre, are coping with the longstanding and equally impossible
hypothesis of tbe dual nature of our earthly world, tbe creation of a God who
bas given us not only the Chrasmologic Writings but the Bible as well. He who
built the Long Sun also built our world.
The Book ofthe Long Sun is a rich, multi-stranded work, and tbe theme of the
gods/Outsider, significant as it is, is but one of many. Wherever we look, the
issue of whether science and fantasy can co-exist ultimately dissolves into merry
ironies and beyond tbem into the context of our very familiar cultural concems.
Chems, for instance, provide many such rich ironies. Chems such as taluses,
huge ones that can serve as soldiers or security staffs and that can hold perfectly
plausible conversations with humans (or biochemicals, as humans are known
in the
 Long Sun), provide satire on human labor contracts; their presence in a high-
tech world also offers Wolfe a chance for an extended leg-puller on readers too
eager to find fully scientific explanations. One reads attentively to follow bow
taluses are constructed, but they seem like the products of
 a nineteenth-century
foundry, not a silicon culture. Their heads are made of brass, explains Swallow,
a talus salesman: "A talus's head requires some pretty complicated castings,
and brass is easier to cast than iron, so we use that for the head" (4:134).
159
John Gerlach
Chems that seem more human, like the Mayteras, in effect nuns that assist the
Pateras in teaching schools, are evidently capable of some kind of reproduction
and can cannibalize each other for
 parts. The biggest stretcher is that chems can
reproduce. They in fact have not, but they were programmed to do so. As
Hammerstone, a soldier chem explains to Silk, "Each of us is hardwired with
half the plans. But the thing is, it might take us a year or so if we're lucky,
maybe twenty if
 we weren't, where you bios can do the main business any night
after work" (2:224). When Marble proposes to make a child with Hammerstone,
the joke is again sexual. Nettle, a young girl at Silk's manteion, announces when
caught spying, "Maytera caught me and made me quit, but when she went to
work on her child again I came back" (4:316). Nettle seems to witness at the
keyhole a comically primal Freudian scene between robots.
Shy and supportive, a chem like Mint can be inspired by the gods to become
General Mint, commander ofthe rebellion against the Ayuntamiento. Details of
the their bodies come as surprises to the reader: as Maytera Marble comforts
Silk, "smiling she clasped his hand in hers, surprising him. The soft skin had
wom from the tips of her fingers long ago, leaving bare steel darkened like her
thoughts by time, and polished by unending toil" (1:60). The image is hardly
plausible if we wish to read with the eye of the scientist, and in that sense sci-
ence fantasy is consistently inconsistent. But most readers will be more pleased
than bothered, for we perceive not so much the metal, but a metaphor for fingers
worked to the
 bone. We take these dedicated and loving women not as mechani-
cal creatures at all, but as people, interesting people in an intricate and interesting
fiction, which itself
 begins to lose its boundaries, as I hope I have demonstrated,
as fiction at all. Just as with the gods and the Outsider we are ultimately con-
fronted with the mysteries of duty and sexuality in our world, transformed un-
der the illusion of the fictional imagination.
The jolting ofthe fictional rules by which we interpret the game we're play-
ing as readers, whether we're trying to figure out gods or chems, are not un-
pleasant violations of genre rules but opportunities for humor and understanding
that most of us would choose to enjoy with complicity. Wolfe affords the reader
the luxury of a long escape from our world into a new Whorl but reminds us
ultimately that this fiction is still grounded in our world. As The Encyclopedia
of Fantasy argues, fantasy isn't an escape from mimetic reality, but an adjust-
ment of perception that restores our ability to know our world, changing our
perception of it.
Science fantasy proves to be,
 in Wolfe's hands, as stimulating as Scholes had
hoped. Its very instability and inconsistency is precisely what generates spar-
kling ironies, moving the reader through hypotheses of the primacy of science
to comical revelations that characters from the whorl listen to with straight-
faced credulity, to a vehicle to revisit one of our culture's most continuing and
compelling mysteries—in what way is God in our world? Science fantasy, the
160
Wolfe's Book of the Long Sun
genre of impossible objects, easily lends itself to the exploration of longstanding
issues of mysterious multiple perspectives within our own world.
Notes
1. I've capitalized the terms that lead to entries within the Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Such refer-
ences constitute a sort of hypertext version ofthe most comprehensive theoretical approach to
fantasy now available.
2. Citations refer to the paperback editions. As I develop answers to questions about the relation-
ship of the "whorl" of the Long Sun to our world, I stay within the four-volume series itself
rather locate answers within other works by Wolfe. Discussion on connections to earlier works
has been a hot topic on the intemet—see in particular the archive of discussions at http://
moonmilk.volcano.or/whorl/archives, and the review by John
 Clute. I received a copy of Michael
Andre-Driussi's Quick and Dirty Guide to the Long Sun Whorl by the time I had finished this
paper, but subsequent versions of this guide, available through Sirius Fiction in San Francisco,
could be very valuable for further study.
Works Cited
Attebery, Brian. "Science Fantasy." Twentieth Century American Science Fiction Writ-
ers. Vol. 8 of Dictionary of Literary Biography, part 2: M-Z. Ed. David Cowart and
Thomas L. Wymer. Detroit: Gale, 1981. 236-42.
Baber, Brendan. "Gene Wolfe Interview." 3/20/94. http://world.std.com/~pduggan/
wolfeint.html (Aug. 1997)
Clute, John. Rev. of Exodus from the Long Sun. The New York Review of Science Fic-
tion 9 (June 1997): 6-8.
Clute, John, and John Grant. Encyclopedia of Fantasy. New York: St. Martin's, 1997.
Jordan, James B. "Gene Wolfe Interview." 1992. http://world.std.com/~pduggan/
gwjbj.html (Aug. 1997)
McClintock, Michael W. "High Tech and High Sorcery: Some Discriminations Between
Science Fiction and Fantasy." Slusser and Rabkin 26-35.
Scholes, Robert. "Boiling Roses: Thoughts on Science Fantasy." Slusser and Rabkin 3-18.
George E. Slusser and Eric S. Rabkin, eds. Intersections: Fantasy and Science Fiction.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1987.
Turner, Alice, "Theophanies and Possessions." 3 Feb 1997. http://moonmilk.cotn/whorl/
archives/v2.html#iO3 (Feb. 24, 1999).
Wolfe, Gary K. Critical Terms for Science Fiction and Fantasy. New York: Greenwood,
1986.
Wolfe, Gene. CaldeoftheLongSun. Vol. 3 of Book of the Long Sun. New York: Tor, 1995.
. Exodus from the Long Sun. Vol. 4 of Book ofthe Long Sun. New York: Tor, 1997.
. Lake ofthe Long Sun. Vol. 2 of Book ofthe Long Sun. New York: Tor, 1995.
. Nightside the Long Sun. Vol. i of Book ofthe Long Sun. New York: Tor, 1993.
Zelazny, Roger. "Fantasy and Science Fiction: A Writer's View." Slusser and Rabkin
50-60.
161
Copyright of Extrapolation (Kent State University Press) is the property of Kent State 
University Press. The copyright in an individual article may be maintained by the author 
in certain cases. Content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted toa 
listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may 
print, download, or email articles for individual use.
