‘
¢‘
4 l:“€;Ö
Allfiäiiä
‘ Äafaiää
NE WOLF E
1
„··¢" &·*-
_??_s$§;„ "*:;„„
O . ,(1=_;:¤f;h ·»k._
t Q~“ (,(7l1'$§i,§§:··}
' . .„ ‘„*·»„§+», [ „ M
I Qo ‘; l 4 :¢~· ,;_*;***»;
‘ NÄ j ;» g! ,_, { „:„V .· „;\_¤§‘:*-,
l , ’ [ ;; ,*5 é, ' ,.„;>„y‘;\;—
V · » _/‘, ly Q _ — w„_:~.„ »„.,__",\
l V. ‘ V$E‘_ff;v} rv: fee ·  V , ,.\\
1 , ’t" /,·¢>~*‘ g»
_— aw ¢·-„ » &_ =¤ · ,· J. »
, « ,6 x ’ · » ‘ , n X ,—>„ /
l · ‘ \ v_,„ H X s — \ [ag :M
' M, n g ‘** , n ~ S} **4 M ‘·
nn $;„‘ ‘;u‘,g / ,:°V·«„  ' A _ —, ¢
“ i';?~ #—?‘:‘$··*’§ wär · · nf
I \ ‘ « fßpwrxi ¤ _ A; [
·~„ jf;· * ';·»‘ ‘»§>~ ’«·' „
I } ‘ , ‘ f J » :1 “ /·
.\ Ä „ QM. ~ ‘; _
I V ;= „; „„· „ ·
[ ,' ;é *:‘·**§ « _ .
L m . M *:,, *a.j:« ‘ ‘ ‘ _L
* S §Y:;* T Pr P “
Z »‘;«„6? #/ 0
w e a5‘° ¢* „ *_· ‘^ '«_„v
· ,:3;;. F; · H ·~ *”
V „ „ **1* ‘· —» §¥~ ·
‘ ¢ ' ‘??‘!¥’? W: L · ··
„ E ‘¢ , g·—'; ff «··‘*"*·
—, , — ar ··§·s; 6 „„ ßn. —
sf g, «§q: " » · „ ¤'«.f"Ü*
*' j ’:, f:«Pé‘ä";€€ ·§r~¤ "~ '
l ~ · „;{\ *»
*6:3. ·
. ~;}§~—» I« "
‘ · ösäärséä
S‘1‘ARMOr~1 1‘ READER‘S GLLIDE 29
Serim Edimr: Roger C. Schlohin
J?__?_? _;,;t_,?0;0;??c;??;?0c0;?;;nxc;0;;?,rt?;;0;?tx;;;9xxx?,;;7??000??n,;e,x;;m,t
1,,
0
, ?n,,?, ,6? x';c>' ,x,;, , ': ;,; ,
, ,, 0 '.'x,, -CmJ,, ??; " ,, .?,?,
'' ^ 2 ,, ,, ? ', i?,,
'9 , ' , "u ;;' u ?, ? p_?; , ?
" , i ; ' ?? , x c ? ' , ?3
?? ,, C' , ^ ', ' , , ,. ,' ',
, v? - , ; ,, ' " ' ?L " ,, ' , ,? ' ' ' ' ; , ?
=, ',, x ; ^
" ': ?! ' ;, ," 0
u , ^, ! ;' ,;, ,, ,;;,,,,,w,, ;,,x,,;;,',, "'x,'' , v,t'' 0
? , , :;, . ;';;';,, ,,,, , ' ?? ^ '.
' '' ,, ? "','''n "' t î?
'? ;",x'x?':', ? ?
" ' i tc,'; ? ,,;', i ,,''?
,;, ' :' ', ,n ?i ' ,,
? ; ,',' Cu ' '

for my mother, CONTENTS
, ~ Edna K. Gordon
Citations and Abbreviations ..........
Library of Congress Cataloging—in-Publication Data I ChrO“OlegY ef Life end werks ~···«·
Gordon, Joam I II Introduction .................
Ge W lf .
ne ° Q III operatmn Aass ................
(stamont feadelns guide ; 29) IV The Fifth Head of Cerberus ..........
Bibliography: p.
Includes ind€X_ V Peace .....................
1. Wolfe, Gene--Criticism and interpretation. _ _
L Titl€_ II. SeKieS_ VI The Devil in a Forest .............
PS3573.052Z68 1986 813'.54 85-17163
ISBN 0__93026l_l9_4 VII Short Works   -     „  .   .   .  „
ISBN 0-939261-18-6 (pbk.)
VIII The Book of the New Sun ............
Published and copyright © 1986 by Starmont House, Inc. All _ _ _ I
rights reserved. International copyrights reserved in ali IX Cemplete Aenetetee e1bllO9FäPhY of FlCtl¤¤
countries. No part of this book may be reproduced in any elted bY flfst €d1t1O¤S -····-- -  1
form, without express written consent of the publisher. For _ _
information address Starmont House, Inc. , P.O. Box 851, Mer- X Se]-eeeedend A'}VK?tät@d Blbll-OQf8PhY of
cer Island, WA 98040. Cover design by Stephen E. Fabian. Norefletlen WUUVYQ ······· ~ ~-- 1
JOAN GQRDON, who has a Ph.D. in English with a specialty in XI Selected end Annotated S@C¤¤ÖaFY BibliOQfäPhY
science fiction from the University of Iowa, teaches at
C.W. Post Center of Long Island University. She writes Index ······· · ·--  .....
reviews for the Science Fiction and Fantasy Review of the Q
S.F.R.A., which is published as part of the Fantasy Review.
Her previous publications include The Starmont Reader‘s
Guide to Joe Haldeman. Q
\
1
\
X
{
1
‘\
M
il
ik 111
_ __
for my nD ther,
Ed na K, Go don
Libra of Cocqess CatalOging-in-blication aata
don, 3 n,
Ge ne olfe.
(Sta rTa nt reade's gu ide ; 29)
Biblioqraphy p
ncludes index.
l. lfe, ne- riticism and interpcetation.
T, Title, II, Series
S3573.U52Z68 l986 l3'.54 85-l7l63
IS O-93026l-J9-4
S O-93926l-l8-6 (pbk.)
PtJ bli5h ed and copyright l986 by Sta nt House, Inc. Al l
right5 reserve. International copyright5 eserved in all
c a3 ntries. pa of this k y be epr Od uced in any
fo, without express witten consent of the publishe. For
into tion addres5 Sta nTD nt House, Inc., P.O. x 85l, mer-
cer Tsand, WA 98040. Cover design by Stephen ,. Fabian.
, o has a Ph.. in English with a s pe cialty in
science fiction tr an the Univesity of Iowa, teaches at
C,W, Post Center Of Long .sland University, She writes
eviews for the _cience Fiction and antas Review or the
S,F.R,A., wh ich is publised as pat of the Fantas KevieW.
Her previ Ous publications include _The Starmont Reader!S
Guide to J Hald, n.

_
Citations and Abbreviations ,. .
T Chronology o{ Life and Works , . , . . , , .
IT Tntroduction . . ... .... , , ,
III 00rationES .. . . , , . , ,..
IV T_he Fifth Head of Cerberus , . . . . .. . .
V _PaCe. , . , . . . ,. ,. . , . ..
VJ m_evil inaForest. . . . . , . . . . .
VJI Short Morks. . . . . . ,.... ... . ,
VTIT T_hek ofthew Sun . . . . .
IX Clete Annotated Biblicaphy o Ficti On
cited by first editions. . . , , . , . , . ,
X Selected and Annotated BibliOgraphy o
Mon-fiction Mriting. , ,.. . . . .
XI Selected an Annotated Senda Bibliography
Tndex. .. ... , , , . , . . . .

CITATIONS AND ABEREVIATIONS I
CHRONOLOGY OF LIFE AND WORKS
Because science fiction tends to go in land out; of
print I cite both page numbers of first editions see Ma 7 l93l__ . B N
primary bibliography) and chapter numbers of Wolfe's work. 191;:% L- Garl ;;m;;>°‘<1>;;· L_UYrmin a S 6 4
These citations occur parenthetically in the text and use _ Y'_ 9 CEO S gre Ü 9·
_ bb iations contracts polio without permanent effects.
the f¤ll¤w1¤¤ a rev ' 1939 —— goes to the New York World's Fair.
_ 1941 —— moves to Houston Texas to live for foui
h I l I
CA years, after years of having moved every one c
. . years.
CC 1949 —— graduates from Lamar High School in Houston, e
Texas A. and M.
CO 1951-1952 -·— writes for Texas A. and M. humor magazine.
Th De _l _ Fcrest 1952 —— drops out of Texas A. and M. and is drafted.
DF 1953 —— sent to Korea to fight in Korean War in A;
_ ceasefire in July.
FH 1954 —— discharged from the army, enters Universit
Houston.
I
GNBD 1956 —— graduates from University of Houston with I
. hired by Procter and Gamble in Cincinnati,
OA marries Rosemary Dietsch.
P P E 1957 —— begins writing, theoretically to provide incom
BBL buying furniture.
. 1958 —— ' ' ’  ’ I
SL The Sword Of the Llctor child, Roy Emerson II (after Wolfe s tat.
1960 —— second child, Madeleine, born.
ST I 1963 —— third child, Therese Georgeanne, born.
t Oth 51; ‘ and 1965 “ $$115 flrSt Sherry, "The Dead Man," tovsir,
TIOD I first science—f1ction story, "Mountains Like M
Other Stories ; to ;£_
1966 —— fourth child, Matthew Dietsch, born.
1967 —— first Orbit publication, "The Change1ing," ir
bit.
1970 —— §ration ARES, first novel, published; "The I:
of Doctor Death and Other Stories" published in
bit 7; first Nebula Award nomination (best :
story) for "The Island of Doctor Death and (
Stories," which was second in voting to "No Awa
1972 —— leaves Procter and Gamble and becomes editc
Plant Engineering, Barrington, IL; The Fifth
V of Cerberus, novella cycle, published.
. 1973 —— father dies, wins Nebula Award (best novella
n "The Death of Doctor Island"; receives first
. nomination, for "The Fifth Head of Cerberus."
1975 —— Peace, mainstream novel, published.
iv I l
I
crTnTIa3S AYD EVTIS
Because cience iction tends to gO in a Out of
pint, cite th page numbers of first editiOns (see
ri bibliraphy) and chapter ns Of MOlfe's rk
These citations occur parenthetically in the text a we
the folli abbeviati Ons
cA _me Citadel of the Autarch
CC m_e Claw of te nciliatOr
m_e Castle of the Otter
_me vil in a Forest
FH _The Fifth Head of Cerberus
Gene 3fe ' s k of s
0h 000fation
P _Peace
S m_e Sword of the Lict Or
ST _me Shadm of the Torturer
TToD _me Island of tor Death and Other StOr ie5 a rd
Oth_er Stories

__ _
I
Y OF LIFE AM D ha3 KS
May 7, l93l--born in Brklyn, Y
1933 -- earliest memOy, Of unning acoss green g:
contracts lio without nna nent effects.
l939 gs tO the Mew YorX Morld's Fair.
l94l -- mOves to Houston, Texas, to live for ouJ
years, after years of having ra ved eve one c
years
l949 -- graduates fr L4na r High Sch l in Houston, e
Texas A. and m
l95l-l952 -- writes for Texas A. and m. h ura r gazine.
l952 -- dr s out of Texas A. and m and is drated,
l953 -- sent tO Korea to ight in Korean War in A
cease{ire in July.
l954-- discharged fom the ay, enters Univesit
H ou ston.
l956 -- graduates from University o Houston with
hired by Procter and Gamble in Cincinnati
rries Rose ietsch.
l957 -- be gins writing, theoretically to provide inc an
buying furniture
l958 m first child, Roy erson I (afte Wolfe's at
bo rn.
l960 -- secOnd child, madeleine, bo rn.
l963 ird ild, m erese Ge orgeanne, bo rn
l965 -- sells ist story, ''The Dead man,'' to Sir,
first science-fiction sto , ''mountains Like m
to If.
l966 -- f Ourth child, Ma t th ew Diet5ch, rn.
l967 H first O _rbit publication, ''me Changeling,'' jr
bit.
l970 -- 00rati On , first nOvel, published; ''me 3
of ctor ath and Other Stories'' published i;
bit 7; fist mebula Awad nomination (best
story) for ''me Tsland of cto Death and (
StOies,'' wh ich was second in vOting tO ''MO Awc-
l972 - leaves Procter and Gamble and becomes edit(
Plant Enaineerina, Barrington, IL; _The Fit th
of Cer ru s, novella cycle, published.
l973 father dies, wins mebula Award (be5t novella
''me ath of ctor Island''; eceives first
n ination, or ''The Fifth Head of Cer be us.'
l975 _Pe ace, ma instream novel, published.
l

i II
__ · ‘ Forest adolescent novel, published, ‘
:__ :ago FOUHÖHT-iO¤ for Llterature INTRODUCTIQN
Award (best novel) for _E_e1a_eg-_ _ _
1978 -- Rhysling Award (best long sc1ence—f1ct1on for
“'I‘he Couputer Iterates the.Greater Trumps , even Ä
American Nights" published ln Orbit 2.0.* _ Gene Wolfe writes elegant and evocative prose 1
lggg - refuses to fall clearly withina specific genre, Tnongx
Other Stgries, first short StO'—'Y C?ll€Ctll°“' writes within the science-fiction network, Wolfe prefers
' erst VO um 1 identify his writing as speculative fiction, and
Of P“bllSh€d‘ f Th } preference reflects the variance of his work from tr.
1981 -.. wing World Fantasy Awöfq (West novel) ,§;% ‘ tional science fiction. His stories do not necessarily
Shadow ot the Torturer: Ill1¤¤lS Arts Councl Ya? science, nor do they always take place in a future or al
"ln Lookmg Glass Cas; äh' hate world. Although it uses science and the future,
Secon? Volwre .0 ·—ä major work, the tetralogy The Book of the New Sun, has 1
Book Of the New Sun, D¤bl1Sh@d7 of the feel of fantasy. Wolfe seldom stresses action or
StOrY collectlom gäblls f éhe mechanics of how things work.
1982 -- ;u1a Award (best ¤¤‘/@1) {Pr E Even when Wolfe's stories do use science-£icti«
conciliator; ' th,lr EO tl devices and settings, they differ from most other eci«
Published? fiction in their emphasis on ambiguity, psychological na
of the Otter published; tive, and mood evocation. This emphasis has made h
me of PU writer more frequently appreciated by writers, critics,
11Sh€d_ \ scholars than by the mass of science-fiction readers.
Gene Wolfe is a clever man. He has a biting, iro
swiftly-paced sense of humor; laces his conversation I
puns; states his seldom mundane or predictable v
i unequivocally; and argues them stubbornly and well. Whe
{ chooses to ignore a question-—he has little time for
I norant or prying questions——he does so with equal stubb
1 ness and skill. In his speech and in his writing
1 reveals his complexity, though seldom directly.
religious and political beliefs fit his character
writing: strong, complex, and hard to categorize. He i
a Catholic in the real communion—taking sense,
which tells you a lot less than you think about
my religious beliefs .... I believe in God, in
the divinity of Christ and in the survival of
the person .... Like every thinking person, I
am still working out my beliefs.
Politically, I am a maverick. I agree
with the far left on many issues, with the far
right on others, with the center on still
others. I distrust concentrations of power,
whether political or economic. I am a strong
environmentalist. I believe that we are higher
creatures than we think we are, and that animals
are closer to us than we believe.(l)
é 3
2 1
_______________
l976 -- me vil in a FOrest adoletcent vel, blish
l977 - nDther dies; wi icagO OundatiOn fOr iterature
Award (best novel) for Peace
l978 -- mysling Award (best lon9 science-ficti On ) for
''.e Cuter Iterates the Greate T''; ''n
ican Mights'' publjshed in Orbit 2
1980 me Island of t Or ah and Other Stories and
Other Stories, fist short stoy collection,
publish; me Shadm of the Torturer, first l
of e k of the Mew Sun, published
l98l -- win_s Morld antasy Award (best novel) for The
Shad o the Torturer; llinois s ncil Award
(best short stoy) for ''In king Glass Castle'',
me Claw of the Conciliator second volune Of The
Book of the Mew Sun, published; _ne WOlfe's k
of aa 5, second short sto co3lection, published
l982 -- wins Mebula Award (st nOvel) for me Claw oE the
Conciliator; me Sword Of the .ictOr, third vol
of me k o the w Sun, blished; 'me Castle
o_f the Otte published; me Citadel o? the Autarch
fourth volume of _The Book o the Mew Sun pub-
l ished
2

Even when wolee s s_tores do use sclenelctl
I
I MTR O CTIOM
Gene Molfe writes elegant and evocative prose
fuses to fall clearly within a s pe cific genre, m oug
ites within the science-fictiOn net wo rk, Wolfe prefe
identif hS Writln9 aS SßeCUlative flCtiOn and
preference reflects the variance of his work fr tr
tional science ficti On His stOries do not necessaily
science, nor do they always take place in a utu n Or al
te ld AlthOU9h it USeS 5CienCe and the fUtUre,
jor rk, the tetaly me k of the ew Sun, has
of the feel of fantasy, Wolfe sel an stresses action or
ch ics o h m things wo rk.
l ' ' t
devices and settings, they differ fr an mOst other sci
fiction in their hasis on anb i gu ity, psy ch ol og i ca l na
tive, and mood evocation Thi5 emphasis has nade h
wr iter ra re ff 0 ently aQeClated by Wlte5I CltlCSI
5cholars th an by the ma ss of science-fiction reades
Ge ne lfe is a clever rra n. He has a biting, irO
swiftly-paced sense of h r; laces his conversation
puns; states his seldom mundane or predictable v
un equ ivocally; and argues them stub bo m ly and well. e
ch es to ignoe a question-he has little time for
n Orant or p ry i ng qu estions--he d s so with e qu al stub
ness and skill In his speech and in his witing
reveals his complexity, thouqh seldan directly
eligious and political beliefs fit his chaacter
iting strong, c lex, and had to categoize. He i
a Catholic in the real union-taking sense,
ich tells y a3 a lot less than you thi nk abo ut
my religious liefs.... I be lieve in in
the divinity of Christ and in the survival Of
the rson.... Like every thinking pers On, I
still wo rki ng t my be liefs.
Politically, I am a ma veick. I agree
With the fa left On ma ny issues, with the fa
ight on others, with the center on still
Others. I distru5t concentations of power,
whet-her political or econic, T an a strong
enviro ntalist, I be lieve at m are higher
Creatures than we think we are, and that animals
ae Coser to u5 than m lieve(13
3

Though a reader can find some of Wolfe's politics and · · - . . _
religious beliefs in his fiction, Wolfe is a private person 3,-[id1:hi.tirlr:S€ol€rll:e matämes lt Posslble for Gene wol
who speaks little of his personal life and uses it only in- camit-mente didrht peirhit aoi;ghgiké1srfil‘l—ti1r:eljob and f
directly in his writing. _ _ I ou ine, fe mana I
Wolfe, an only child, was born on May 7, 1931, in ggäänezf ngägtgpgtwiaizcgornlng bafofe ha left for wo?
Brooklyn, New York, and for the first ten years of his life four hours Of writih eV(;mng' I USUÖUY 99*1 in
moved frequently—-to Peoria, Illinois, and to Massachusetts, isolation of a basemeng ind aturday and SU“daY·"(5)
Ohio, and Iowa. When he reached fourth grade, the family Concern for disei iu Y helps Concemiföte these h
settled down in Houston, which became "my home town, the their characteristic tphme also mms wolfels Stories
place I was from. "(2) Wolfe attended Texas A. and M. where lg mess Of Structure and imögery
he majored in mechanical engineering, "I suspect because I w · -
someone told my father and me it was good thing to take un- stariltjgaääe aäliäi Sil. the waY thF®¤Qh« then
til you made up your mind.“(3) He dropped out of college in at the begihhih glmmg' Fhan Start again
the middle of his junior year, 1952, and was drafted for the three drafts. gMost.th.EV€VY€hl¤Q 99tS at least
Korean War, serving in the infantry and seeing combat. In many get four lus I mgaget foarj A good
1954, after he was discharged, Wolfe returned to Texas and I beeih to wonäer if thcontinue tolrevise until
ccmpleted his Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering i really imprevemente 6 Cha¤Q€‘$ I m mäklng are
at the University of Houston on the GI Bill. Five months 1 out the piece whe. . . Then- I stop and Send
after his graduation and their reunion, Wolfe married “ least a week bétwg nevfaa Posslble, I allow at
Rosemary Dietsch, the little girl from Peoria with whom he that week to wo k en revlslqns ana I USUallY ¤S@
had played when he was four. After graduation, Wolfe worked E On Somathlng elsa- (6)
for sixteen years for Procter and Gamble in Cincinnati, wol  · _
Ohio; among his other projects, he designed the machine that as kiissstadäaäg Industry and inspira
forms Pringle‘s potato chips. He then left and became an I Though it is difficult tls hie am ma charact-8
editor of the trade journal, Plant Engineering, based in types of fiction-—science fieeo Categorize Wolfe·s wor}
Barrington, Illinois, where he worked until his recent ‘ new fiction, and SO Oheeth ion, science fantasy, ran
retirement to write full-time. Gene and Rosemary Wolfe live j bOdY ¤f Works; (1) ehtertree main tYD@s emerge withi;
in Barrington and have four children: Roy, Madeleine, either a (2) Sgciolo icaimmentsl and SGHOUS. Story
Therese, land Matthew. I Naturallyr Wolfe ee agperSOnOrf(3) PS1/Qhological v
This sketch of Wolfe's life suggests some of the does not write stories th t f·O complaxliilf and 1ndire«
material of his stories. An only child who spent the first within these three cat a· %t_traCtablY_ and €XClus:
years of his life moving around the country, he often writes contain more elements egorlesl msteam ms Stories US)
of isolated children and uprooted adults. His short career and they align with eh; One category than of the ott
at Texas A. and M., his army stint, and his years of working Of writing more theh Wehaoncama and attflbütes of one
in industry suggest his stories of people trapped by regu1a— A eypical Wolfe 1 t the others. e n
tion. The sketch cannot indicate why a man who holds down a E puns and litera Ore;.€rta.lnm€nt lS_ qulta Shert.
full-time job and has a large family to care for drives him- ending, and, thouä it lstoncal allualO“S' has a SUV!
self to spend his leisure time writing five pages a day and light in tone gAlthomal1treat a Serious theme' ren
why he has so many powerful stories to tell. The answer to Story may require rec a thoroughl understanding o1
these riddles lies within Wolfe's character, not as it·1S Catch puns and surprisags girl Of allijslons fand the Ski:
shaped by exterior events but as it shapes them. In an in- definite closure withouf SSG Sfomaa täfplaally end W
terview with Gardner Dozois in Xenolith One, Wolfe said, "I the Stories. evehte e . Suggastmna ot ‘?“‘b19¤1*¤Y €iY1h<
don't think fiction is a proper vehicle for philosophy ex- are the most accessitflanofhä lftarprejtaalons Of them.
cept that the character's philosophy affects his ac- Of this Sort Of Story are HC 0 ne s fictipns. Most ty;
tions."(4) Because Wolfe is the person he is, he writes HO "How I Lost the Seeehd wo läaiq (TIOD), Car SIUISCGK,)
matter how difficult or inconvenient it might seem. German Invasion., (heth in ÄNBD af and nelped Turn Back
For any artist, a very unromantic attribute must aC" Summed up ih the last l_ ) The flret is a brief :
company native genius for the talent to bloom; that is diS· Semantic joke' The SeCOn$“;n§Yt:i$§¤*€1h~other word
s ories build E
4 5
_ l
ThOugh a reader can find sane O MOlfe's politics and
religis beliefs in his fiction, lfe is a private r0
wtlo saks little Of his rs Onal life and uses it Only in-
directly in his writing
Molfe, an Only child, was bOrn On Yay 7, l93l, in
BoOklyn, Mew York, and fOr the first ten years of his life
raved frequentlyto Peoia llinois, and to Massachusetts,
mio, and Ia, Men he eaced Eourth grade, the 'ly
settled down in HoustOn, which be ''my h t, the
pla I was fr,''(2) lfe attended Texas A and where
he maJored in mechanical engineering, '' suspect beGause
one told y father and it was g thiq to taXe un
til y de up yOu ml'nd.''(3) He drOpped t of llege in
the midd3e Of his junior year, l952, and was drafted for the
KOrean Wa, senFing in the infantry and seeing ct In
3954, after he was discharged, Molfe returned to Tes a
leted his chelor of Science in mechanical Eqineeri
at the University Of Ha3ston on the GI Bill Five ranthe
after his graduation and theîr reunion, WOlfe married
ROse Dietsch, the little gir fr ria with he
had played when he was f Our N-ter graduation, Mole woked
f Or sixteen years for Pocte and Gamble in CinciMati
io; ng his other projects, he designed the chine that
fOnTG Pringle's potato chips He then left and c an
editOr o the trade journal, Plant En0ineerin, based in
rrington, 1linois, where he woked until his ecent
retint to ite full-time Gene and ReTnary le live
in Barringt On and ha our children: Roy, madeleine,
mese, and matthew.
This sketch of MOle's life suggests some Of the
material Of his stories m only child who snt the first
years of his lie ving around the untry, he often writes
Of isolated children and uprted adults His short career
at Texas A and m., his ay stint, and his yan o woking
in industry suggest his stoies of people trapped by regula-
tiOn me sketch cannOt indicate wh a n who holds down a
full-ti 70b and has a large family to care for dives h-
self to spend his leisue tî witicq five pages a day d
why he has sO ny erful stories to tell. me answer tO
these riddes lies within Wolfe's characte, not as it i5
shaDed by exterior events but as it shas them. In an in-
tenriew with Gadnef zOis in Xenolith One, lfe said, ''I
dOn't thinX fiction is a prOper vehicle for philosophy ex-
cept that the character's philosophy affects his ac-
ti Ons.''(4) uuse le is the rson he is, he writes
tter h dificu3t or innvenient it might seem.
For any artist, a ve unntic attribute st aCX
cny native genius or the talent to bl; that is diS-

cipline DiSCipline make5 it pOSSlble fO Gene Wol
fi the ti tO ite mgh his full-ti Job and f
'tnents didn't peit a igid routine, te manag
hour o{ witing each mOning befOe he left f Or r
ather hou Or twO each evening. ''I usually get in
four hours of witing on Saturday and Sunday''(S)
ilation of a base31ent study help5 ncentrate these h
Concern for discipline also hones lfe's stoies
eir characteistic tightness Of stctue and image
T write the piece all the way through, then
start again at the giming, then start a a'
at the inning., Everything gets at least
three drats. most things get fou, A good
many get fou plus T continue to evise until
I begin to nder if the changes I 'm making ae
really irovenents Ten I 5top and send
out the piece Wheneve possible, T allow at
least a week between revisions and I usually use
that week to rk m sthing else (6)
Wolfe 's artist caTMs fr th indust and inspira
as his storie5 ran his life and his aracte
mgh it is difficult to categoize WolEe's wOr,
types of fictionscience fiction, science antasy t-an
n fiction, and so on--thr in types erge withiI
y of works: (l) entetaints, and serious stOi
eitheF a (2) 5ociological or ( 3) psychol Ogical
Maturally, Wolfe as a person of lexity and indice
ds not write stories that fit tactably and exclus:
within these three categoies; instead, his stories us'
cOntain e elenents o om catego than of the Ott
and they align with e conces and attibutes of One
O iting rare than with the others
A tmical Molfe entetainment is qu ite short,
puns and literary or historical allusions, has a su
ending, and, though it y treat a serious theme, en
light in tone. A1though a thorough under5tanding O:
stO y equire ecognition of allu5ions and e ski:
catch puns and surises, these stories tmically end w
finite closure, wiout suggestions ot iguity eith
the stories ' events o in the interetations of them
are the st accessible o lfe's fictions. most ty
Of thi5 sort of sto are ''Cues'' (TIOD), ''0 SinisterF
Lost the Second Wold hlar and Held TUrn cl
Qn Invasion'' (both in BD). me fist is a brie
SUed up in the last line by a pun--in othe wOc
Sentic joke. The send and third stories build
5

1 .
y , u tti to thos ' - ‘ ·
around puns. other stories, such as "La Bef-ana" (TIOD), l gangddesääj enlgrtaiment; il;-Egniemfüiihol iizfäiiiwho ex:
rely on the reader‘s recognition of allusion (here, to the Such ambiguity is even more pervasi .°n'
Christmas story and to an Italian Christmas legend) and are str-cngest werks, his nsyehelogical Stories Vähäghwzäf
less frivolous than the punning stories- s t influences of Proust Di ° .
wolre·s entertainments are reminiscent Of Damon sägries, Wolfe's most powerrul äägnsrligätngl B„j’V°°S m· tr
Knidhts stories, especially Knight'S classic “TO Serve his psychological stories, and it is here thägcä rjiideé
Man_··(7) with both writers, skill lies in the Will and apt- most Valuable contribution to the elevaticn 5 e· es
ness with which puns are presented and surprieee are Sprung tion to an important literary categgry Wolfi- Science 1
upon the reader. That Wolfe shares much with Damon Knight cal stories build worlds from the minds f tc: PsYchol<
is not surprising: Wolfe's career has several links to who inhabit them Wolfe shows us ways inOwh· E clxaract
Knigh[‘5, Wolfe has attended several sessions Of The Mil- ceive worlds, strange or otherwise rather the mmds E
ford Conference, run by Knight and his wife, Kate Wilhelm, l to Shgyg Objectively observable worlés that chin P*;!'P0!'l
Wolfe‘s stories have appeared in fourteen of the twenty-one Q nebit and te which they read:. These ps chol Ifael ers
Orbit anthologies, which Knight edited. Knight encouraded · focus umn the workings Of a mind ratherYthan°9lCa :*1Ol
weite, in 1966, to expand a short story, "The Laughter Out- · a planet, and this focus character-izes thupon t osé
Side at Night," into his first published novel, Qgration largest and best_,knO,,m Portion Of wOlfe,S re i §tFOnQ€
ARE5, which Knight then bought for Berkley- This enCO¤raQe— them are his novella cycle, The Fifth Head pe; Sue. An
ment may partly explain the dedication of The Fifth Head of 1 well as other superb ncyel !
Cerberus "to Damon Knight, who one well~remembered June eve~ Nights," mrracking Song}- and „,I€he Island fegsn Amen
ning in 1966 grew me from a bean." Wolfe describes Knight ‘ Other Stories" (in TIOD), his tgtral 'I‘hO¤k· Death
and Kate Wilhelm as gmore or less the older brOtner and Qin, his mainstream novel Peace, (äiyd
sister I never had."( ) stories. l
The entertainments, however, form a rather small These works sh '
proportion of Wolfe's production, especially as he repre- Q do they tend tQ inccot-Zeägéeniiigés nglsgmsgnpliä N°t_‘
sents it in his anthologies, The Island of Dr. Death and I devices common to his entertainments and hi; s Stiälis
other stories and Other Stories and Gene Wolfe's Book of ‘ S*1OrieS, but they use many other devices a $$0
Dayg, They reveal Wolfe's tricky and cerebral humOr, though ‘ with Unil/ersal yet quite personal issues SLZS 1 to C
they don‘t reflect further intricacies of his mind and Writ' tnrbed children, alien or inverted myths and lee ygr C
ing. More strongly represented in the anthologies are non—human sentient species confronting one anogsn s,
wolfes sociolodical stories. Characteristically, these mpeatedly to illustrate themes of iselati er ap;
deal either with an ecological issue ("An Article about the Search for self and human identity Igntnmemorm -
Hunting-- in GNBD) or with the power of systems over the in- Wolfe adopts a cool tone, recollectin emoti age storl
dividual ("Forlesen," also in GWBD), or with bOth, as ln tän¢e of time and space, even when tge voi On· mt? a C
Qiigtion ARES, Their most common motif, reminiseent _Of narrating protagonist. Such distance e h ge ls n all C
Franz Kafka, is the minor bureaucrat lost in a COnf¤51n9 tiOn of the character and the imncttengg) gälzes t 9- lsc
maze of societal rules and regulations that remain a mYSl?€l-TY Caption of events. Puns and allusions ·ci in E
CQ the individual. Wolfe typically relates such stories ln ¢nalC, Or esoteric Vocabulary stylistgc O¥mal'
a flat, business-like tone that mimics the callous landnage °9mPO¤nd—complex sentenceg th build dist n lrgctlpnl
of bureaucratic management or of environmental explOitatlOn V1SiOn, and ambigdity-all tt-aits Of w lfan?e' lntncacy
Because Wolfe deals with the confusion of human beings teristic fiction. O 6 S NOSC Char
COping with rednlatory coldness and pOintleSSneSS- 9 The psychological stories deal with ·
employs ambiguity; we cannot be sure, any more than the reality, which - , Perceptlonä
protagonist can be, ot the rules, motives, schemes, and welfe shows thegiräevyäg ih; ääääätof sind if th? percen
decay that surround us or him. Such ambiguity, which within stories as many as six la; yd em eddmg Sto]:
precludes tidy closures to these stories, is an element his most exubgrant use ct the tecänls eep (Egg- Conti
strongly associated with almost all of Wolfe's work lt is dream sequencee with events tnet séguet) QQÖ by bleu?]
an element which is, on the one hand, necessary tO e€f@C“' empirical level, wclge lets dr m · Of On a surta
tively document the worlds he envisions, and on the other eams ln ect reality,
6 7
______ t __
aun pun. ther stoies, such as '' fana'' {TIoD)
rely On the Feader's e niti On O allus On lhere to the
Cris s sto and tO an Italian Ctristns legend) and are
less fivo3 ou s than the punni ng stories
MOlfe's entetalnmentS are eminlscent Ot Damon
Knight's stoies especially Knight's classic ''To Serve
Fb n,''(7) With th ites, skill lies in th e wit and apt
ness with which puns are pesent ed and su q rises are sp q
u n the eade. m at fe shares mu ch with n M ight
is not surprising Molfe's caeer has several links to
might's. e has attended several sessions of 'me il
fOd Conference, n by Might and his wife, Kate t3ilhe.
lfe's stories have appeaed in Eourteen of e twentyne
Orbit anthol ies, which M ight edit ed m ight encouraged
lfe, in l966, tO eXeand a ShOt StOy, ''me LaU9hte t
side at Ni9ht.," into his fist ublish ed nOvel, 0D0ration
5, which Knight then bought for YerkJey, This encourage
nt ma y pa rtly explain the dedication of The itth Head of
Ce ru s ''to n Knight, Wh o one wllre _red June eve
ning in l966 grew rcR fr a be an'' Wolfe descri be s Kn ight
and Kate Wilhelm as ''more or less the older brother and
siste I neve had,''(8)
The entertainments, howeve, form a rather sma1l
prOrtion nblfe's poduction, especially as he repre-
sents it in his anthologies, The sland of ath and
Othe Saries and Ot her Sto0ies and ene Wolfe's Bo ok of
m ey reveal Mo fe's ticky and ceebral h r, th ough
they dOn't reflect uthe inticacies of his min and writ-
ing. mOe 5trongly Fepcesented in the anthologies re
3e's sOciOlical stoies. Chaacteristically, these
deal eithe with an ecological issue (''An Art icle aut
Huntinn,''in BD) or with the er oE systeTTG over the in-
dividual (''Forlesen,'' al5o in GWBD), or with th, as in
ati On ES. Thej most co mm on motif, eminiscent Of
Franz Kka, i5 the minor bureaucrat lost in a nfusing
rnaze of scxietal rules and regulations that rein a nyste
tO the inividua3, Wolte t m ically relates such stories in
a lat, business-like tone that mimics the callous language
of bureaucratic ma nage nt or u enviro ntal exploitati On
cause 3olfe deals with the confusion of human beings
coping with regulatory coldness and pointlessness, he
ena ly5 amb iguity; cannot be sure, any more than the
potagonist can be, o the ule5, motives, sches, and
decay that suround us o him. Such ambiguity, which
ecludes tid clo5ues to these stoies, is an elent
stongly associated with al Ta st all o Wolfe's work, Tt iS
an ele nt which is, on th e on hand, ecesa ry to effeC-
tively dc nt the wolds he envisians, and on the Other
6

__
, upsetti to e scie-fii readers em
de9ire entertaints t end i a re6olutim.
Such ambiguity is even re perv8ive in Wolf
tst rks, his ylicl storie mgh
8t influenCeS O PrOUSt, DCkenS and 8o90S in tt
gtorie6, lfe'9 t Ul and Original vOi re6ide!
hig ychOlic8l 8tOrie5, a it is hen that he makes
gt valule cOntriti On tO the elevati On Of cien
ti to an ' ant litea t lfe's ycholc
cal stoies butld Orlds r the nu'nds OE the chaact
o imit lfe shms u9 ways in which minds E
ive rlds, stra Or Oeise rather than purI
8tw1 obJectively Obsenrle rlds that characters
h8bit 8nd to ich they react mese yolical sto
fs upon the rkings of a mind rathe an upon the
a planet and this focw characterizes the strong
largest and st-k rtiOn of olfe's repertoire
th are his vella cle, me Fifth Head of Cerrus,
ell as other superb novellas , 5uch as ''Seven Ameri
Mights,'' "Tracking hng,'' and   me  Isla of a
Other StOries'' in TIO), his tetral me k of the
Sun, his mainstream novel _Peace, a many of his sh
stories ,
mese rks shm lfe at his t 0plex, t c
dO they tend tO inrate ratifs, themes, and styli
devices cOon tO his entertainnents and his sociologi
stories but they use many other devices as well to   
with universal yet quite penonal issues, Loly or c
turbed childen, alien or inverted myths a legends,
nOn-human sentient species confonting one another apf
atedlY tO illustrate ths Of isOlati On, memOry,
e search fo self and hn identity In ese stori
lfe adOpts a l tme, recollecting tim f a c
Of ti and space, even en e voice is that c
naratirq protagonist, Such distan hasizes the isc
ti On O the chaacter and the ' rtan o{ in E
Ptim Of events PuM and allusions join with fOnnal,
& aic Or esoteric abula, stylistic indirection,
COmPOund-complex sentences to build distance, inticac
ViSim, and anbiguityall traits o ol{e's most char
teistic fiction.
The peychological stories deal with percepti On
eality, which va with e state of mind of the rcei
le shms these layers of eality by embedding stOr
Wthin stories as many as 5ix layes deep (Peace cOnt  
hiS t exuberant use of the technique) and_by blend
de sequences with events that s to on a su  
empirical level. Wolfe lets dreams infect realitY,
7

Borges would say. He also uses metaphors to blur the dis-
tinction between imagination and empirical reality. He may wolfe's anthologized stories: "oreatly underrated Gene
lßgin a Hetaphor in Such a way as tg nake seem a Separate is One Of the finest UÜÖGFÜ SF WL‘lt€fS,"(9) Woltg h
story embedded in the main narrative. Then, he connects it indeed been underrated, not in reviews but by the extent ai
to a second story or circumstance, turning it into a hie readefehip, as hie performance in Nennla and nn o O
metaphor unconnected with the main narrative. The ccmpetltlcns demonstrates. Wolfe has appeared all; lagig?
uetaphorical interludes may well be as vivid, as realistic, twenty times on the final ballot for the Nebula Award wh' h
ae the perceptions in the main narrative which we had taken is Veheo Upoh bY memhets of the Science Fiction wriéars lcf
to be the "real story." Finally, he metaphorically connects AmeFlee· hle nOVella, "The Death of Dr, Island ·· w 9
the second embedded story with the main narrative and oqnes 1973, and the second volume Of Tha Book of the Ne; S °nTä“
round full circle. All these devices teach us that percep- Sword of the Lictor, won in l98 ,f‘;
tions are all we know of reality and that perceptions change times in the final ballot for the Hugo Award Votodnuy lge
according to the allusive, associative nature of the mind. fans attending the yearly world science fiction co P?} Y
Wolfe's psychological stories are far from typical of Heweverv l98l marked a Change in Wolfe'; popdlarlt nf/entäom
the science—fiction traditions and conventions. For readers Of his hdeks appeared on the May, 1981 Looos Ya - me
raised on Clarke, Asimov, and Heinlein, Wolfe's stories flctien bestseller list--The Qlaw Of thé l·C€€nC?_
don't “feel" like science fiction precisely because they de- flret Pleeer ln
emphasize the empirical reality so many science—fiction T Days in eleventh, cnarlos Brown' ig EPS-
writers stress to give their concocted worlds credibility. PlleY—’,WnOEed that this is a ready-d_ ' Q com-
Some of the apparatuses of science fiction nevertheless = el e'5 concerns 35 a w · - . .
appear: Severian of The Shadow of the Torturer takes his l Part ef the reason for nig, algeäloiniohlsosäälef moloate
training in an abandoned space ship; The Fifth Head of Cer— l rest of the reason Stems, frgm dlstrioutioä P ,l?Orl;€y' . The
berus describes two alien planets; "Seven American Nights‘ read, a Science—fiction writer noods GX ASU __b wlo€lY
takes place in the future; "The Death of Dr. Island" uses l hewsstahde and Steries in popular eoienCa..fplotir€ Ochs On
new technology. ln spite of the apparatuses and because of l Before , Wolfe did not non magaZ1m?S°
the angle of perception, Wolfe generally prefers te Call hie of exl-’o5l‘re· Thendh WOlfe‘s science—fiction alle that kllld
work speculative fiction. Since the hard sciences--physics, l966' with the Pnblication of "The Dgad Mancirelfr began ln
chemistry, and astronomy, for example--play Such a Small ; two oook'leh@th SCience—fiction publications, b fe had Only
role in his work, "science" isn't very descriptive, whereas l <l970), which was usually out dg 9 91-6 -1980:
gpeculatign, the question "what if," is vital to WC>lfe'S l tholälg more Pepnlet in England, and The Fäéénltnégdtgä
fiction. -..LlE 72), which was mor · —#··——· —
Not only is Gene Wolfe‘s speculative fiction atypical, was a Speeteenlar Seller. Moitstoiaäqtäéalall/dal;ljlblti;e° Ndltller
it is demanding as well, and demanding to a degree some ‘ wad published in book-length antndlo l Or er tlptlon
science-fiction readers find uncomfortable. The n0tiOn that Knightls Orbit series) rather than in tnogmols (especlally
science fiction provides light, escapist reading hae just l trlbuteo end wldelY*read science—fiction rg wldely G15-
enough truth to make many of its readers expect stories and lgglr Welfe'S exposure increaaad ma§aZÄn€S° In 1980
which contain straightforward, unadorned plots and style, length Werks Pnblished, all of which na. 9 ad four book-
though they may also contain disturbing, thought—prOVOkinQr b@S¤—S@11er list, including twdl/Sh ak-äeared On the
or scientifically sophisticated elements. Wolfe'S StOfles Mons end two inetallments of his tatral OKT StOry Collec-
are, in contrast, ambiguous in their implications and COn' With the popularity gf tnaaa O?/'
clusions, They are lucid, yet mysterieue and baroque, aho C OVO ume; came relssués
leave unprepared and unsophisticated readers baffl€Ö· malnstroam hOVel Peace, and his, -hlS
The atypical and challenging nature of W0lfe'S fictien BOV9.l' advertg du t hlstorlcal
partially explains his reputation in science fiction as a Urlhd _this same time nérloo lse as a fam:eSY'
writer better known to science-fiction writers, editcre, and I,gthOloglCellY'lnSpired science—fictidn Säule Of Wolfe ls
critics than to science—fiction readers in general. Malcelm Mae "YloelY dietributed Isaac ASimOV'SO;l(?S appeated. ln
Edwards‘ evaluation in The Science Fiction ElncyClOQedl.a.. _ln 1982 and l98
ecnoee an opinion often stated in editcrial lntfdddetlehs to a;ida1Iiri1;2inn
8 and he completed his tetralo§,T7%
9
_ __
rges ld say. He al uses netaphOrs tO bJu the dis-
tinction tn inaginatiOn and iril realitY He y
be9in a netaphor in such a way as tO ke it a rate
sto d in the in narrtive, men, he ncts i't
to a second stocy or circumstance, turning it into a
metaphor uncOnnected with the main narrative, The
netaehOrCal interl UdeS y ll be aS ViVid, at aliStC
as the perptioM in e in narcative which d taten
to the ''eal story,'' Finally, he netaphorically cts
the second ded sta with the main narrative and s
m Eull circle All ese devis teach w at ra
tions ae all knm o nality and at percepti Ons charqe
according to the allusive, assiative nature O Ule mind.
lfe's psycholical stoies are far fr typical o
e scien-fiction traditions an  nventions, For readen
CaiSed On Clakel A5imOV, and Heinleln, Olfels StOieS
don't ''fl'' like science iction prisely use ey de-
hasize the empirical reality so many science-fiction
wites stress to give their ncocted rlds credibility,
of the apparatuses of science fiction nevertheless
apear; Severian of me Shadm of the TOrture takes his
taini in an abandoned space ship; m_e Fifth Head Of Cer-
berus describes t alien planets; ''Seven hTerican Nlghts
takes p1ace in e future; ''The ath of , Island'' uset
rRw technolo9y. In spite o the appaatuses and cause of
the arqle of ception, lfe geneally pees to call his
rk speculative fiction Since Me hard sciences--physics,
chemist, and astronomy, for example--play such a small
le in his work, ''science'' isn't ve de5criptive, ereas
speculation, the question ''what if,'' is vital to MOlfe's
f ict ion.
Yot only is Gene Wole's speculative fiction atypical,
it is emanding as well, and demanding to a degree s0 e
science-fiction ceaders find uncanfortable. me ratiOn at
science iction provides light, escapist reading has ju St
enough truth to make many o its eader expect stOrieS
which contain stcaightoad, unadoned plOts and stYle
though they y al5o ntain disturbing, thought-pr OvOki,
or scientiically sophisticated elenents. Wolfe 's stOieS
ae, in ntast, ious in eir iqlications a n-
clusions, mey aFe lucid yet rysteri Ous and baroque, a
leave unpepared and uns Ophisticated eaders bal,
The atypical and challenging natue o{ le's fictim
partially exlains his reputation in science icti On a5 a
ritec better kn to science-fiction wTites, editos, a
critics than to science-iction reades in genea, l
Edwards' evaluation in The Science Fiction Enc cl00edla
echoe5 an opinion often 5tated in editoial intfOductiOnS tO
8

__p_________ _______
fe5 anthologized stories ''greatly undeat, ne
e i one of the finest efn SF writers''(9) lfe has
,deed en underrated, not in eviews but by e extent Of
, reader5hip, as hi5 pe rfo nce in Me la and HugO award
titions demonstrates. Wolfe has appeared at least
nty tis on the final ballot fo the Mebula Awad, which
s voted u n by mbe rs of the Science Eicti On Witers Of
rica. His nOvella, ''The Death O Dr. Island,'' wOn in
g73, and the second vOl O The k Of the ew Sun, The
rd of the ictor, n in l98l. He has appeared Only five
t;s in the final ballOt for the HugO Awa-d, vOted un by
fan5 attending the yearly wOrld Science fictiOn C0nVenti On.
H ver, l98l ma rked a change in MOlfe's po pularitY ree
of hi's books appeared on the may, l98l, cus science-
fction bestseller list--The Claw Of the COnciliatOr in
fist place, The Shad Ow ot the TOrturer in third, a nd ne
lfe's k _of Da ys in eleventh Charles , e
iler, nooted that this is a recOrd.
Wolfe's concerns as a writer, and hi5 style indicate
t of the eason for his slax rise tO pOpularity. The
st of the reason ste ran distribution. TO widely
read, a science-iction write needs exposure--boOks On
newsstands and stories in po pula science-fiction rrxa Jazines.
fore me k of the Yew Sun, Wo3fe did not have that kind
of ex pos ue. m ough Molfe's science-iction career gan in
l966, with the publication of ''me ad Man,'' he had Only
two k-length science-fiction publications befOe l98
00oration AR S (l970), which was usually out o print in the
US, thOugh e po pular in E rq land, and m e Fifth Head Of
Cerbe rus (l972), which was n steadily available. Meither
was a s pe ctacular 5eller. most of Wolfe's shorte iction
was ublished in book-length anthologies (especially
Might's Orbit seies) rather than in the re widely dis-
tibuted and widely-read science-fiction ma gazines. n l980
and l98, Walfe's exposure increased. He had four boo k-
len9th wOrks published, all of which have appeared on the
Cus best-seller list, incJuding two short-story collec-
tl Ons and t installnts of his tetraly, The k of the
W Sun. Mith the pulaity of these vol s came reissues
O The Fifth Head of cerberus, Operation AREs, his
lnStream novel eace, and his young adult historical
nOVel, The De vil in a Forest, advertised as a fantasy.
DUrig _this 5ame time period, four of wolels
thOlically-insired 5cience-fiction stories appeared in
the Widely di5tibuted 5aac Asimov's science FictionMa
aaine. n lgg2 and lgg _3, his stories gan ap ang in
T _he maaa2ine of Fanias and science Fiction and ziX i
ence Fiction stories,nd he coieted hi5 tetfalo9y. it

v « Ill
appears then that Gene Wolfe is in the process. ot b<;§<¤¤}nQ I
not Only 3 wgll respected but a widely-known science- iction OPERATION ARES
w¤t€rThis is as it should be, änd Edwards. svslmatlom Con:
tajng ng exaggeration: Wolfe writes some ot science
iiction's fi¤€SC DrOSc· His Pross has the sompleätäi/1, Operation ARES (1970), Gene Wolfe's first published
Grass' amd rsscmance tO.lsF lt stand ss Supefäcr wzäld O? novel, seems to have been written by someone else. Its
both within SC1@¤C€ rlcrlon and wlthlm the Wyss test matterof-fact DKOSQ, protagonist—as-mouthpiece, and concern
fiction. may hlsnlgrii im- with political issues are uncharacteristic of Wolfe's man-
acnisvsmsmt mus far in a Carssr that promlssslfterlar ver- ner, though some of his continuing interests do appear in
prove. The expansiveness of its form ans rn? éuit wälfgs the novel. Wolfe shows his lasting concern with such issues
Sätilirlf or its herorssüortursr besutltu Y f u rises as ecology and the oppression of individuals by large social
nosoriptivs and Symbolls power' A wrltsr fullhollänrgg and inStit¤T'-iO¤S, bllt ÖOGS SO without his usual desoriptiva and
and Öéliqnrar W¤l¢@ Offers the greatest Of C 8 Q mtaphorical language, his psychological exploration, and
rewards to those who stud)! nun- his ambiguity.
Operation ARES posits a twenty-first century America
Nmss in which the welfare system runs rampant and a backlash has
. . .„ ·· ‘ sla ed down the 1950's upsurge in government concern and
(1) Joan GordO¤, °°An lnrorvlsw with sens Wolfe, expäifditure on science and technolOQY· lnSt@äÖ, Dcoplc dia"
smmr igslj p' l8° 7 trust the sciences and fear individual enterprise. The
(2) "Gene Wolfe: ·An Inteäview, · p' ° result is a repressed, depressed, and mechanically broken-
3) Vector interview, D- · _ A · ·· ‘ down society ripe for revolution. The novel‘s protagonist,
(4) Garoncr DoZois' "Am lmtsrvlsw Of Gens Nolte, John Castle, finds himself part of a revolutionary organiza-
One, D- 26- tion called Operation ARES. Operation ARES is spearheaded
(5) Ätor interview, p- by invaders from Mars, people who had colonized the planet
(6) Gordon inrsrVlsw' pf ' . — · I when technology was king and were abandoned there when it
(7) Damn Knionrv (Garden Clty was dethroned. The plot traces Castle's involvement in the
NY: DOUbl@ÖaYr l976)' pp' 9-1% 3 t 14 1978. Martian invasion and in the re—establishment of the ancien
(8) horror from Gsms wolfs tO JOan,,GQrd$I).;é Siäanoe fiction regime, technological democracy. The novel‘s action is
(9) Malcolm Edwards' WOlts' G€,ns’ m divided into two sections: first, Castle's normal life in a
@Ö· Poror Nlcmolls (Gar sn Y, midwestern town under government control, and then his ad-
Doubleday, l979), P 660· ventures after he leaves home——during his trek east as a
government prisoner, his sojourn in New York City, and his
involverrent in armed rebellion.
The first part of the novel establishes Wolfe's
Speculations about our possible future: a society under
repressive military control, one with its technology and
ecology in shambles, broken by such dangerous liberal
policies as an unwillingness to fight the Cold War and a
glorification of the welfare system--grim and conservative
Spéculations. Wolfe's technique is uncharacteristically
conservative as well, more reminiscent of vintage Heinlein
than of the more contemporary New Wave. The novel‘s
protagonist is an intelligent science teacher who serves
mainly as a mouthpiece for the novel‘s speculations and
philosophy. Such a role is an honorable one in old-
fashioned science fiction but unexpected in the work of an
= 1
10 ; l
___ _ ___
a afS then that ne WOlfe is in the c ess ot- c in
nOt OnlY a well Ces ct bu t a wiely-kn n science-fictia
ite.
m is is as it sh Ould he , and E dw ads' evaluaton n
tainS no eXaqe CatiOn: hlolfe wites o ot scien c e
fictjn's finest pcose. His pcose as te com plexi
qfaCe, and eSOnance to Jet it stand a s s u p e r i o f w i t i n
bOth within science fiction and within the ide world ot
fcti On The Ok o the ew sn may be is gceatest
achevent thus fac in a cacee that ises only to im
OVe. m e ex n5ivene5s of its fo and the liteca y vec
satility Of Lts heO-astortucec autifully suit 4lolfe's
esciptive and s lic pow ec. n writer full ot su cises
and deli9hts, WOlte Offers the getest o chaJlenges and
rewa5 to those who study him.
N0T ES
(l) n dOn, ''An Intecview with ne Wole,'' Science
t'icti On Review, S r l98l, p, lY.
(2t ''Cene WOlfe: m Interview,'' Vector, p. 7.
(3) Vecto inteview, p. 8.
(47 Gardne zOis, ''An lntecview o ne Wolte,'' _Xenolitt
On e, p. 26
(5) Vecto inteview, p. l3.
(6) Lb rdon inteview, p. l9.
(7) n Knigtt, The st ot lbran M i ht (Gaden Cit y,
Y: ubleday, l976), pp. 9-37.
(8) tte can Gene lfe to oan Gordon, Sept. l4, l978.
(9) Ma l lm Ec3wads, ''Woe, Ge ne,'' in m e Science Fjction
Enc cl0dia, ed. Petec Nicholls (Gaden City, M:
ubleday, l979), p. 660.
lO

_ t _
IlI
OP TION ES
O eation AR ES (l970), ene alt-e's t-ist pu blished
novel, seeTT6 tO have been witten by SOmeOne elSe. ItS
ttef-fact pOse prOtagOnist-as uthplece, and cOncen
with litical iSSues are unchaacterlstlc Of lte's n-
r, though s aTe O his cOntinuing interests dO appear in
the novel. Wole sh m s his lasting concern with such issues
a5 ecol and the OpeSSl On Of individUalS by lar9e S Oc lal
institutions, but d s sO with Out his usual desciptive and
taphoiCal lan9Ua9e hLS pSyCh030glCal eXlOatlOn, and
his lty
O0eration AR ES po sits a twenty-first centu ry Ame rica
in which the welfae system nJ ns amp ant and a backlash has
5lapped down the l950's upsuge in gOver nt concern and
e xpe nditure on science and technol Ogy. Instead, pe Op le dis-
tst the sciences and fear individual enterprise. The
esult is a eDessed, depessed, a nd ne chanically brOken-
d s iety ri foc evolution. m e novel's potagoni5t,
ohn Castle, finds hinGel part of a evOlutionary organiza-
tion called 0pe ration AR ES. ration E is s pe aheaded
by invaders f mars, people who had colonized the planet
when technology was king and were abandOned there when it
was dethroned. m e lot traces Castle's in lve nt in the
Ma tLan invasion and in the e stabliS nt of the ancien
-ne, technological democacy. The noveJ's acti On is
divided into t wo sections: first, Castle's no l life in a
miestern t under gover nne nt contol, and then his ad-
ventures afte he leaves home--during his trek east as a
gOve nne nt prisoner, his sojoun in Yew Yok City, and his
invOlvent in a d ellion.
The fist part of the novel establishes Wolfe's
Seculations about ou possible future a society under
ePessive milita ntrol, one with its technology and
eCOlO in shambles, broken by such dangerous libeal
licies as an unwillingness to fight the Cold War and a
9lOification of the welfare system- im and consevative
SCulatiOnS. Molfe's technique is unchafactefistically
COnSevative a5 wel3, ra re eminis ce nt of vintage Heinlein
than O the re contempoay ew ave. The novells
PrOtagOnist is an intelligent science teeche who 5erves
lY as a rauthpiece for the novel's speculations and
.lOs Ophy. such a role is an honoreble one in old-
aShioned 5cience fiction but unexcted in the k o an
ll

auf-her whe ¤e¤allY aveide tne tecnnlqnes O; täneaotilicgggéiy ' end the first section of the book makes clear that this is
Wolfe supplies his protagonis W1 q _ t atantly a novel ef ideas.
gratuitous love ihtefeetr ih e Qestnre at nnmanlzlng the ä bl The second and larger portion of the book emphasizes
keeman for his political COhCeVnS· The gesture ls A tions in the world built by the earlier exposition. It is
äggual, the relatiOhShiD ¤hÖeVelOPed·_ and John Caätla 1-isch more lively, subsuming exposition to action, and con-
remains less cohvihCi¤Q as a liVi"‘€J belnq tnan_eYen minor taining escapes, tactical maneuvers, battle sequences, and
Characters in most of WOlfe‘S other w0rk· E><r>¤S1¤¤¤_¤<>¤¤@S night journeys through New York City. Wolfe's political
in undideated hlecke r¤¤¤@§l$h¤¤ bälngeaääiggäicég Stance remains overt, expressed in stilted political discus-
natural course of story—te ing. o sions among the characters. However, daring escapes,
speculatiehs and ideae t¤r<ä¤¤h 1tYt nrO‘id‘é‘a£t]i;gS;;t%Ji'äh ls; Strange religious rituals involving lions, and dramatic ex-
tures to his students, an po 1 ica I losions make this portion seem less heavy—handed.
Ngmggigl the Captain. Thus, such straihed dlalegüee as the P One eg the meet Eascinating eeenee et tnie Section is
following deliver Wolfe's message. Tia Marie‘s Hunting ritual in Chapter Six: it fascinates
_ _ largely because of its mysticism and mystery, qualities
Almost brihgihg the flght lnte tne epen' _JOnn generally absent from gration ARES. "Tia Marie believed,
asked, "WhY ÖOh°t YOU make tne rald tonight? or pretended to believe, that the entire structure called
You could, I know." __ civilization was an illusion cast by man on mankind":
The Captain chuckled. "I find my men do a hence, her cult of the Hunters who shuck off the illusion
more thOrO¤Qh jeb eh hama ana Ontnnlldlngs BY and follow such "uncivilized" practices as "astrology and
dax/light: MF- Castle} animism, spiritualism and the Seven Works" (Ch. 6, p. 95,
··5ti1l amateurs after tWe_htY YeanS· QA), Fer the benefit of followers and a visiting dignitary,
Captain?" It had been that long since rioting she stages a miracle consisting of the sudden appearance and
had made Peeeihle the ensnenslon Of tn€_COn- disappearance of a huge lion as the cultists chant for him
stitution and the installation of a President to bring them a successful hunt. The scene is dramatic and
Pro Tem chosen from among the bureaucrats ad- stirring, but Wolfe purposely deflates its grandeur by ex-
ministering the welfafe Df®QtemSj posing the whole demonstration as a trick. The exposé
"Now, Mr. Castle, that is just the sort of changes the scene from the shadowy ambiguity of Wolfe's
thinking that will get your name' on a little speculative fiction to the sharp-edged, thorough explanation
slip like mine. When the old police were dis- of traditional science fiction and indicates how different
solved by the DUDUC Willv Our agency came into the aims of Operation ARES are from those of most of Wolfe's
being to offer something better." fiction. Typically, Gene Wolfe uses ideas and speculations
"What you mean is that the people who put to build a work of literature; here he uses the medium of
you in pewef W¤¤lÖh°t Stand for a real pollce literature to build his ideas and speculations. The concern
fgrcg SO they got you--too weak te Dfeteetr but is not fiction writing but politics and the shift il-
strong enough to oppress. If the armed forces lustrates something about the nature of the novel of ideas.
hadn't been gutted at the end of the Cold War it The most noticeable stylistic discrepancies between gra-
eould never have happe¤ed°° (Ch- lr P· l8'l9' tion ARES and Wo]_fe's other work include its lack of
OA) psychological probing, descriptive scene setting, metaphor,
b t word play, and ambiguity. These elements involve the reader
The first part of the exchahgä Eifipele gnäystovgé/'leain in the world of the novel rather than in its ideas and make
welfe'e real concerns become eVl eh OO qnl_ _ * ' the search for meanin in the novel as important as the
through an öWkWö!’-°ÖlY iheetted nit Of e}‘POSltlOnT_'It had meaning itself. A noveg of ideas such as Operation ARES, on
beeh that leng ·  '“"“%eVeCäalI däéitclsspzicähéäogätäni the Other hand, takes care to provide large signposts so as
America Wolfe imagi¤eS· as e S to avoid the search, si n osts such as conversations and
novel's political Stöheez P§7¥§l‘aYin9 weläfégljsywääksgääeägi äctures devoted almost exäläsively to the novel's ideas and
reggive and a strong H11 1 afl! as ne _ _ S repetition of key phrases.
€1ell—being, without much concern for character-bu_ild1r£g· In Operation ARES the key phrase is ,.pOw€r dwells in
5Ueh emphasis on pelitiee O‘/er Show 15 am/plcal Of wol e' the heart," which Wolfe goes on to explain through dialogue:
12 13
au o who usually avoids the techni es of e old sc l.
3lfe supplies his potagonist with a relatively
gratuitous love interest, in a gestue at humanizing the
spokesman foc his pOlitical concerns. The gestue is
casual, the relati Onshi undeveloped, and JOhn Castle
remains les convincing as a living ing than even minor
characters in nDst Of MOlfe's other work ExpOsition s
in undigested blocks athe than being absorbed in the
natural couse of stOry-telling. Mole introduces his
s pe culations and ideas thrOugh tv br oa dcasts, Castle's lec-
tures to his students, and political dialogues wth his
Ye sis, the CaDtain. m us, such strained dial og ues as the
folli delive MOlfe's ssage
Alrat bringing the fight into the open, ohn
asked, ''Why dOn't you make the raid t Onight?
You could, I kn .''
The Captain uckl ed. ''I t-ind my ne n dO a
rrD e thoough Job on barns and outbuildings by
daylight, mr. Castle''
''Still amateurs afte twenty yeas,
Captain?'' It had be en that long since ioting
had made possible the suspension of the C-
stitution and the installation of a President
Pro Tem chosen om among the bureaucrats ad-
ministering the welfare pr ams
''M m, Mr. Castle, th at is just the sort of
thinking that will qet you na ne On a little
slip like mine. M en the old po lice re di-
solved by the blic will, ou agency c aJTB into
be ing to offer thi ng be tte,''
''Mat you an is that the people who put
you in p0w er wouldn't stand for a real po3ice
force so they got you--t we aX to potect, but
sto eugh to oppress. If e a d foces
hadn't be en gutted at the end of the Cold Ma it
uld never have happened.'' (Ch. l, p. l8-l9,
oA)
The ist pat o{ the exchange propels the 5tory, but
Wole's reaJ concens be c aTe evident t qu ickly. We lea
through an awkwardly inseted bit o{ expo5iti On--''It had
been that long . ,''--seveal details of this future
hTe rica Molfe imagines. Castle's la5t speech shows the
nOvel's po litica1 stance, pO rtraying we lfare as we ak but -
pressive and a stong militay as necessay to sietal
well-being, without much concen {or characterbuilding.
Such hasis on po litics over sto ry is atypical o wOlfe,
l2

_
the fi n t section of the k ma kes clear that this is
atantly a novel of ideas.
m e se co nd and lage po rtion of the k emp hasizes
actio ns in the rld bu ilt by the earlier ex iti On, Tt is
ch re llVely SUb5 ln9 eX ltl On tO aCt on, and COn-
teining esca pe s, tactical ma neuves, ba ttle se qu ences, and
night j Ourneys thOugh ew YOk City. Wolt-e's pOlitical
5tance re ins ovet, express ed in stilt ed litical discus-
sions am Ong the charactes, Howeve, daring escapes,
5trange religi s ituals invOlvi rq lions, and d tic ex-
lions Tnake this rtion seem less hea-handed.
On e of the ra st fascinating scenes of this section is
Tia arie's Hunting ritual in Chapter Six: it fascinates
largely cause of its mysticism and mystey, qualities
geneally a bs ent f an 000ratiOn AR ES. ''Tia marie be lieved,
or peterded to believe, that e entie structure called
civilizatiOn was an illusi On cast by man on mankind'':
hence, her cult o the Hunters who shuck off the illusion
and Eollow such ''uncivilized'' pactices as ''astrolOgy and
animism, spiritualism and the Seven Works'' (Ch. 6, p 95,
0A). For the neEit O {oll0wen and a visiting dignita,
she stages a miracle consisting of the sudden apeaance and
disappeaance of a huge lion as e cultists chant for him
to ri ng them a successful hunt. m e sce m is d ama tic a nd
stirri rq, bu t lfe pu sely deflates its gca cx3 eur by ex-
sing the whOle demonstation as a tick. The exposé
changes the scene from the shadowy am biguity ot Wole's
sculative fiction to the sha dged, thoough explanation
O{ taditional science fiction and indicates h ax ditferent
the ain6 Of ration ARES are fr those of rast of Wolfe's
ficti On TSr _plcally, Ge ne Molfe uses ideas and s culations
tO build a rk of literature; here he uses the di wn o
literature to build his ideas and s culations. m e concern
is nOt fiction witin9 but politics an the shift il-
lustrates s thing about the natue of the novel o ideas
The mOst nOticeable stylistic discepancies tmen a
tiOn ES and Wolfe's other wok include its lack ot-
PSychOl Og ical probing, descriptive scene setti , tapho,
rd lay, and iguity, These elents involve the reade
in the mrld of the novel rather than in its ideas and make
the sea Fch for meaning in the novel as i mpO rtant as the
ani rq itself A novel of ideas such as Doration AR ES, on
e Other han, takes care to provide lage sign sts so as
tO avOid the search, signpo5ts 5uch a5 conversations and
leCtUes devot ed a lTa st exclusively to the novel's ideas and
the re pe tition o key phases.
In 000ration AR ES the key phrase is '' r dw ells in
the heart,l|which wolfe gs on to explain through dialue:
l3

"It was something my mother Used te $aY· "We want the right to possess arms restored to
usually it meant the city wouldn't fix the everyone except minors and those with a record
Streets ... She always Said it when she was ; of narcotics addiction or criminal activity . .
talking about how much better ordinary Peeple . . We want a complete end to the system of wel-
were than bigwigs .... " fare payments .... We intend . . . to set up--
·l3eCause we are setting out to humble the by constitutional amendment, as a right--·an ir-
powerful, in a SenSe·" (Ch· 8: P- 137: OA) revocable income for every citizen .... If we
. . . can hamner out a peace that leaves both
Although the phrase sl-lggeste that the meet PO"fe*”_f‘~·‘l sides intact, both Russia and China will feel
defenders of a land or an idea are those whose convictions that they still have a chance of gaining a posi-
are npst heartfelt, Wolfe interprets it in a less PY—’ediCt‘ tion of paramaunt influence .... They'll bid
able way (and that unpredictability is certainly typical of against each other, and with a little diplomacy
the bulk of Wolfe's writing): power dwells, or should we should be able to keep the bidding running
dwell, within discrete individuals rather than in con- fgr yeai«S, (cn, 10, p, 203-206, OA)
glomerate power structures. Interpreted in this way, "power
dwallg in the heart" suzmwarizes the triumvirate of C¤nse!?Va‘ Though the novel espouses traditional right-wing virtuesy
tive political views which this novel eSDOUses¢ ¤{Q9ed ih‘ its suggestions for achieving those virtues hardly follow
dividualism, laissez faire economics, and iSOlatiOhlsm· cgnservative party 1ine——Wolfe'5 ideas are never cqnpletel}
Tne constitutional president, an Old meh hamed HU9“ predictable. The recorrmendations, however, are so specific
gins, makes a speech te the De<>Dle« attemptihs te Perehade that the novel's didactic purpose, to proselytize a clear-
the [\atj_O1') to reject the Pro T€m PI°€$j-dent and hl-5 gOV€rn— cgt Social p]j(XJ[3_m, bgcgngg Clear gngugh that ambiguity am
ment by cabal, while warning against the Pre Tem an invitation to interpret have no place. So businesslike
gOV€rnmentS liberal and internationallst policies- is Wolfe in the attainment of his goal that he has little
time for the playfulness of language which usually distin~
We have no freedom now, though at least our guishes his work. He may make a pun, but he goes on to ex-
tyrants are our countrymen, but we will lose plain it:
that satisfaction together with our language and
our heritage. As a people we have been "We don't any of us mind; set me straight."
entrapped by our desire that someone else do for Looking at him John wondered if he could be un-
us the things we should have done for ourselves. conscious of the irony of what he said, for
At first that someone else was to be our own Japhet was a hunchback. (Ch. 1, p. 8, OA)
government; then, when that government did not
in our opinion do enough, we threw it down and Though Japhet may miss the pun, we don't. Wolfe may name
put in its place that fraction of its empleyees Opposing generals Grant and Lee, but he goes no further in
who offered us the greatest bribe. If we wait suggesting parallels between the nineteenth century Civi.
now for someone else to restore our freedoms, we War and the twenty-first century one. Matters are not open
will wait for ever. (Ch. 9, p. 158, OA) to interpretation.
In its straightforward confrontation of issues and it:
The speech warns modern readers about the dangers of our relative lack of concern for literary techniques, then
contemporary government "by cabal" and is meant to apply not Wolfe's novel of ideas is atypical of his canon. Neverthe·
only to what cou].d happen in the twenty—first century but to less, it deals with the two most common themes of hi:
that which is—H$pening now. sociological stories: ecology and the power of systems ovei
Through the demands John Castle makes for the restore- lndividuals. The ecological disaster of Ogration ARE:
tion of the Constitution in the twenty-first century, Wolfe stens from an overabundance of predators in the wild and 6
makes specific recorrmendations for the restoration of Con- depletion of fossil fuels; both imbalances develop becaus«
stitutional democracy he believes has been lost in the twen- of a lack of interest in pure science. Not only d«
tieth (or believed, at least, when he wrote the novel). predatory animals escape from abandoned zoos to flourisl
14 15
___ _ _
''It was something my mot,he used to say,
Usually it meant the city wouldn't ix the
streets , , .. She always said it when she was
talking about h much bette ordina peOple
re than bigwigs , ''
''cause we are setting out ta hwnble the
erful, in a sense'' (Ch, 8, p, l37, OA)
Although the phase suggests that the most powerul
defenders of a land o an idea ae those whose convictions
are nDst heartfelt, lfe inteets it in a ess predict
able way (and at unpredictability is cetainly typjcal o
the bulk of Molfe's writing): power dwells, or should
dWell, Wlthln dlSCrete indVldUal5 rather than in CO-
glrate er structues, Intereted in this way, ''pmer
lls in the heat'' sizes the triwnvirate of conserva-
tive litical views which this novel esuses: n1gged in-
dVdUali Sm la155eZ faie eCOnlCS, and iSOatiOniSm,
The constitutional president, an old man naned Hug-
gins, Tnakes a speech to the people, attempting to persuade
the nation to reject the Pro T President and his goven-
ment by Cabal, While Warnln9 a9ain St the PfO Tem
vernt's iral and internationalist policies.
have nO feed nOW thOU9h at leaSt OUr
tyrants are our countrymen, but we will lose
that satisfaction tOgether with lauage a
our heritage As a people we have been
entra by our desire that sone else do fo
us the things shld have done for rselves,
At first tat someOne else was to be our own
government; then, tmen that goavernt did not
in r opinion do enough, we threw it d and
put in its place that fraction of its loyees
who of{ered us the greatest bribe, I we wait
n fOr sone else tO estoe ou eedans,
will wait for eve (Ch, 9, p l58, OA)
The speech warns mOden readers at the dangers of r
conterary goverMrBnt ''by cabal'' and is neant to apply t
only to What couI.d happen in the twenty-fist ntu t tO
that which is hapning n,
mrough the deTnas John Castle kes or the restOa-
tion o the Constitution in the twenty-first century, lfe
kes scific ecaTnRndatiOns fo Me festoation of Cm-
stitutiona deraacy he believes has been lost in the twen'
tieth (or believed, at least, when he wrote the novel).
l4

'' want the rjght to possess anns restored to
eveone except minos and the with a ecd
of narctics addiction Or ciminal activity ,
.. He want a clete erd to the system of wel-
fae pants... , Me intend., to set upm-
by constitutional anent, as a righi--an i-
vable incaTe for eve citizen.... Tf we
. . can h out a peace that leaves both
sides intact, th Russia and China will feel
that they still have a chance Of gaining a pasi-
ti of paranDunt inluence. . , , They'll bid
agaiMt each other, and with a little diplcy
we should be able to kp the bidding running
fo yearS.'' (Ch. lO, . 203-206, OAt
mgh the novel e5ses tcaditional right-wing virtues
its suggestiOns for achieving the viFtues hardly {Ollo
eative pay line-Olfe's ideas are ve apletel!
prictable. me endations, hmever, ae sO specifi
that the vel's didactic purpose, to proselyti2e a clea
t ial pog, cares clea enough that aTnbiguity acx
an invitation to interet lave no place, So sinesslik
is lfe in the attaiMrent of his gl that he has littl
t' for the l3yfulness o language which usually distinN
guishes his work, He may make a pun, but he gOes on tO ex
plain it
''We don't any of us mind; set me staight.''
LDOking at him John wondered if he ald be un-
COn5ClOU5 0f the lrOny Of What he Sald, tO
Japhet was a hunchback. (Ch, l, p. 8, )
9h Japhet y miss the pun, we don't. alfe y n
ing generals Gcant and e, but he gs no furthe i
Suggesting paallels between the nineteenth centuy Civi.
ar and the twenty-fist centu one. Mattes ae t ope
tO inteetation.
In its staightfnxard confontation of issues and it!
elative lack of concern for liteary techniques, then
l{e's novel o ideas is atmical of his canon. verthe'
less, it deals with the t most oon themes of hi
i0lical stocies: ecoly and the power oE systems oveJ
ldividuals. The ecolo9ical di5aste of O0ation E:
Ste fan an oveabundance of pedators in the wild and
depletion o fo5sil fue3s, both ilances develop caus
O a lack of intee5t in pue science. t3ot only d
PedatOry animals escape fr aanoned zs to flourisI
l5

affßhg their Smallef ahd weaker_ ceusins, but lack of seien- an experienced and confident writer more often that it does
kngyledae jaaa: tenkenrej d1nt1-1n“t1°n ene q‘-‘a1äe1e;b‘£f a novice. We may speculate that Wolfe began his career with
clvl lza len' un 1 ume 1 ra ums te 1 S more Vu ner e the urge to express his views on politics and government
congätioniäf hélddälhg a¥iO¤h<; lgightltéfele tg KOS? PYeOatO*—°$ policy in novel form, but without the confidence in his
ät Y- e 5 ea Y SUP? Y O OSSI ue S OPO S ¤POh ccn- 5 ability to convey those views through implication rather
Steht SCi9¤t_1f1C eXPlOföt1<>¤, as oil company publicity Ü than direct statement; it is the compulsion of the novel's
fT~”eCI‘~1Ont1éY Egllnte C;1t7ll1n the tW<;¤ty—t1ri<thcentut')ye of % ra- political views that weakens it. Political views do not age
ät äh ä Seiehti ic WO! GVO eh ä ¤\OSt well for the pressing concerns of one decade become the
cembletely abandcned· Science has been S¤bbl_anted_by a tyivia of another, and Wolfe himself has changed his
fOO11eh but OPP!'Oe$lVO bnY~'eanO!'eOY that tFePe 1nd1V1Onal politics for more liberal views. A novel, therefore, cannot
CltlZ@¤S 'HOWGVGLU thl1S Dsöwef Stfücttlfe has advantage depend for long. upon its political stance to remain vital.
OVe1‘ thajae 1n met ef werfe 5 OOO1O1O91ea1 S1}er1eS‘ lt ls If a novel's raison d'etre is its political attitudes, then,
We11“OOf1nOO Nc ene etrngclea tO_d1$OOVO1’ hle O1? her rele the work fails to engage once readers lose interest in those
or stumbles through the bureaucratic maze. John Castle and views. Other work by Wolfe recognizes this vulnerability
hle fellw rebela know exactly where they are ledged ln the and translates politics into more lasting views on the human
System and thla knewledge enablee then te break ent and condition in general, eroreeeea with more attention to the
S11eeeeSf“11Y reVO1$'-· _ The 1aek_ ef cenfnalen exP1a1nS the fiction that surrounds and incorporates these views.
nOVel°e lack ef emb1<JU1tY7 the llnee 1h grauen ARES are A look at the publishing history of Operation ARES
Oleal-’lY ÖFaWh· _ _ _ suggests other reasons for its atypicality. It began in
' We can see why Wolfe 'chose to write h1s.f1rst p¤h* 1965 as an unpublished short story consisting of what is now
lisléxed novel asahel did, deöllng Vllth tgäenxes täpicali of bis the first chapter. At Damon Knight's suggestion, Wolfe ex-
WOY ln an atYP1Oa ‘^'aY SO ae te OOP O nOVe S 1 aaa a ' panded it to novel length in 1966 and 1967. Though Don Ben-
waya clear and Present- B11} wnY d1O he cnaaae te write_ thle son at Berkley accepted the 100,000 word manuscript, he
eert ef nevel when nls prevleus and Subeequent we? 15 _S° wanted it cut to 80,000 words. They fell to work, Wolfe
diffierenté? glherethare tw? danswers tph the qäeSt€O¤ Whleh cutting the first half of the novel by tightening sentences,
Comp einen Ya er an exe U e ene ane er: 1'—°e · 9ES..re' Benson cutting the second half by e cisin entire
tien {anne may have been written meh eat;-1OY than _1te 1970 paragraphs. The result of this expansion end coätraction
OOPYr1Qnt eucqeata anqä may therefcre 1”O»1eOt a d1ffe1°ent appeared in 1970, its manner no doubt changed by editorial
Stage 1nW<>lfe'a wrltlncp befere he had eatabllehed f¤r_h¤¤— eireumetaneee. Expansion took away whatever enigma the
Self h1S Chäfäetefletle mahhefi ahd Second, the Pübllehed first chapter offered about the chances for revolution or
n<>vel_nay net be the atcry he crrdinally wr¤te· and the al- about the true power or even existence of a Martian eaieny.
tOFet1<i>he m¤Y alae eeäönhs fer lte at;:'P€Oa1 natnre-ARES d What was suggested or implied in Chapter One was eventually
E SQGIDS S€I‘1S1 8 O SUQQGSKZ 8 %L‘atlOl’\ OSS Qxplained a d Gl bo at d d th' ‘ ll
not have the watermark of Wolfe‘s distinctive style because have tramplled tähe renäqrxätajgelqjglity lähaixgpärfléiäesmmiesxeof
it had been written before his self·confidence as a wrilter Wolfe‘s fiction. The cutting of 20,000 words, as well, must
had developed thoroughly enough to pr0duCe such O StY O- have had a significant impact on the telling of the story.
Qgration ARES, with its 5CiOhtiet PtOteQOh1etr _itS plet cf Much of what did not contribute directly to plot and theme
Martian invasion, its blocks of exposition, and~1tS emphäele would have disappeared—-metaphor, description, meditation,
Oh ldeee ehe Speenlatlene OVO1’_ 11_tOFeFY teehhlquer Shar<-ES elements which make up Wolfe‘s distinctive style-—and with
!l\UCh'W1th the genre science fiction of the 1950s:. one can them disappeared any subtlety that might have been present
lmaglne the neyel Oe1n9 enOeeSS€U11Y eeF1a11ZOO 1n EELQQ. ll'? the original. Perhaps the 100,000—word version ot gra-
az1neb€1;ä e1m11ä:1t$é aa ltäle eebgeervaelveheelence fl;-” would have contained more fictional accouterments
ion may e resu 0 o e s ginning is scienc - a Seemad l S abe t- f W lf  _
fiction career by an apprenticeship of imitating already- while ääeriréion gägsloysoan Zbäriaiciigälls it is not a
successful practitioners. The result is clear, logical, and monster. It is clear, straightforward, and moderately en-
precise, three important virtues in the work of such conserg tertaining in its speculations, though it dares nothing ar-
V<?t1VO Wlfltefe aa Isaac A$1mOV: although the product of SUES tistically and offers no more than a routine contribution to
virtues is not particularly subtle. In fact, subtlety mar Oldfashionedl hard_COre Science fictmm The book was not
16 17
__ t
their slle and aker asiM, t lac of xien-
tific kn1ge leads tO the dim' inuti of the alitîes of
civiliti until hi ntums to its re vulnerle
cndii-O r huddliq ar night is to kp praton
ac bay me steady supply Of {sil fuels s u -
stant scientific explOration, as oil cpany public1ty
frntly ints t; in e tnty-irst ntu of a
ti On E5, Ulat and a3l scientific work ha been alst
c Omp1etely abandOned Science has en sulant by a
flish t rsi bureauca that trap6 individual
citizens HOwever, this r stctu has advanta
Over thOse in nDst Of fe 's sociolil stories: it ie
llefi. stggles to discover his or her le
Oc stìes thraqh the bureaucratic maze. Jn Castle and
his Fal3 rels knm exactly where ey are l in the
?ystem and this knowledge enables them to be out a
succ,essfully revOlt. The lack of nfusion elain8 the
vl 's lack Of îguity; e lines in 00 0ration a
clealy drawn.
Me can see why Wolfe chose to ite his first b-
lish nOvel as he did, deali with ths tmil of his
rk in an atypical way so as to kp Me vel's idea al-
ways clear and prest t why did he che to write this
Of l en his peviOus and subsequent work is so
diffeent7, There are t answeFs to the 0estion which
canplent rather than exclude one athe: fist, a
ti On may have en witten nuch earlier than its l970
cyright suggests a y therefoe elect a different
stage in fe's iting, {oe he had established for hinr'
self his chaacteristic manner; and se, the published
vel y t e sto he originally wrote, and the al-
terati Ons y also account fO its atypical nature.
Tt see sensible to suggest that 00oratim does
mt have the watennark of lfe's distinctive style because
it had been written befoe his selfonidenn as a writer
had develoDed thOOughly enOugh to produce such a style
000rati On ARES, with its ?cientist protgonist, its plot Of
ctian invasion, its blOcks of exposition, an its asis
On ideas and speculations Over litera technique, shaes
ch with the genre science Eictim of the lY5s: can
igine the novel being sucssfully seialized in A al
Ma a2i e. Its similarity tO this conservative scien fic-
ti On may be the esult of MOlfe 's beginniq his science-
fictiOn caee by an apprenticeship ot imitating already
successful pcactitiOrRcs. me esult is clea, lical, a
pecise, three itant virtues in the k o such aser-
vative writers as Isaac Asirav, although the product of such
vitue is t paticulacy subtle. Tn fact, subtlety naks
l6

_ _
an e ien ced and nfident lter TTD re Often that it d s
a noviCe Ne y S Pe culate that lfe an his caeer with
the urge tO expess his views On politics and gover Mre nt
licy in nOvel fO, but with Out the confidence in his
ability to convey thOse views though q' lication athe
t n diect state nt; it is the c ulsion oE the novel's
litical views th at akens it, POlitical views do not age
ell, for the pressing cOncens of om decade be the
trivia of anOther, and MOlfe himself has changed his
litiC5 fOf ra re ll be fal V1eWs. A nOVel, thefefOCe, CannOt
nd for lOng u po n its po litical stance to e ma in vita.
f a novel's aison d'etre is its pO litical attitudes, then,
the rk fails to engage once eaders lose inteest in those
views. Other wDrk by lfe re nizes this vulnerability
a ta M lates litics into nD e lasting views on the h n
ndition in general, express wi rae attention to the
fictim that surounds and inco rpO ates these views
A lk at the publishing history of O0eration ES
suggests Othe easons fo its atypicality. It gan in
l965 as an unpublished short sto consisting of what is n
e irst chapter. At n Might's suggestion, Wolfe ex-
pa nded it tO novel length in l966 and l967, m gh n n-
son at Be kley accepted the lOO,OOO word manuscript, he
wanted it cut to 80,OOO words They fell tO wok, Molte
cutti ng the fist hal of the vel by tightening sentences,
Benson cutticq the second half by excising entire
paragaphs. me resu3t of this expansion and contaction
appeaed in l970, its nner no dalbt changed by editorial
ci tances. Expansion toOk away whateve enigma the
fist chapter o{ered about the chances for revolution o
t the t ru e er or e ve n existence o a Ma tian co 3ony.
M at was suggest ed or i li ed in Chapter One was eventually
exlained and ela bo rated u n, and is ex pa nsion y wel
have tamDled the eni tic quality that vades st of
lfe's fiction. m e tti of 20,OOO words, as well, must
have had a 5ignificant impact on the telling of e story.
YuCh of wh at did not contfibute directly to plot and the
ld have disap ared- taphor, description, meditation,
elents which ke up Wole's distinctive style--and with
em disappeared any subtlety that might have been present
ln the Oiginal. Perhaps the lOO,OOO d versi On ot oa-
tl On ES would have contai d ra re fictional ac a te nts
a Se d less an ration of oltets pus
ile O00ration ES is an aberation, it is not a
nSter. It is clea, stfaightfonxafd, and erately en-
tertaining in its s lations, though it dare5 nothing ar-
tStiCally and offers no re than a outine contribution to
Old'ashion ed, had ore science fiction. m e k wes no
l7

widely or enthusiastically reviewed, but it ÖOQS not lnvltö I IV
condemnation. It is a journrgiyrnaln efforit ädrxjgtggsegöäär
raduated to full gmild me rs IP: an 1 G .
(difference between the production of a journeyman and that
of a master.
1
. Until the success of The Book of the New Sun, The
Fifth Head of Cerberus was Gene Wolfe‘s best—knovm work for
several reasons besides quality. The cycle of three novel-
las is book-length and therefore more visible than single
novellas or short stories in magazines and collections. The
title novella, which first appeared in Damon Knight's Orbit
10, was nominated for the 1972 Nebula Award and the 1973
Y-I-Jgo Award for best novella, and so it made a name for it-
self as an individual piece.(l) The cycle appeared in 1972,
though its real success did not occur until 1976. In that
year, Ace published the work in paperback, with a perceptive
and flattering afterword by Pamela Sargent. Also in 1976,
Neil Barron noted it in his bibliography Anatomy of Wonder,
praising "the complexity, meaning, and sheer beauty of these
excellently written stories."(2) The two events combined
availability with admiration: since then, The Fifth Head of
Cerberus has remained in print almost constantly.
Though the cycle consists of three novellas, Wolfe had
not originally envisioned such a collection. In March,
1970, he sent the novella "Fifth Head of Cerberus" to Damon
Knight as his Milford Conference story. Knight bought it
for Orbit.
Norbert Slepyan, who at that time was an editor
at Charles Scribner's Sons, attended Milford,
read "Fifth Head," and told me that if I would
write two more novellas to go with it, they
would publish the three as a book. I wrote "‘A
Story' by John V. Marsch" and sent it to him,
and he sent me a contract. Then I wrote
"V.R.T."(3)
Economics, apparently, can inspire art.
The three novellas share two common worlds, Sainte
Croix and Sainte Anne; a conmon character, John V. Marsch;
and comuon questions about the nature of humanity, identity,
and memory. The first novella is a coming-of—age piece
written from the first—person viewpoint of a young man known
only as Number Five. Its setting is a French-settled city,
Port—Mimizon, on Sainte Croix. The grotesque atmosphere is
_ a CFOSS between the fictions of Graham Greene and Mervyn
Q P€ak9« and the plot revolves around Number Five's search for
18
l 19
ton. t 5 a jnen efot by a n w hO late
l ild rship, and it i l lus ta tes ule
' ffeence ten the productjon of a jrnen and that
of a ste.

_t_ __ _
V
THE FIFm OF CUS
Until the success of The BOOk of the Mew Sun, The
Fifth Head Of Cer? was ne le ' s st-knmn work or
9everal reasOns Sides quality. me cle O th novel-
las is book-leng a eefOe re visible than sin9le
vellas Or shO stOfies in gazis and llections. me
ti'tle vella, wich fit appeared in n Might's bit
lO, was nominated fOr the l972 bula Awad and the lY73
yu acd fOr best nOvella, and sO it made a n {o it-
self as an individual piece. (l) me cycle appeared in l972,
thgh its real success did t Occur until l976. In that
year, Ace publish the rk in back, with a perceptive
a flatteriq afterd by Pla Sagent. Also in l976,
Meil BarOn nOt it in his bibliOgraphy Anat of Monder,
praisiq ''the clexity, neaning, and sheer beauty of the5e
excellently written stories.''(2) The two events combined
availability with airation since en, _me Fith Head of
Cerrus has eined in print alnDst nstantly.
mgh the cycle consists of three novellas , lfe had
nOt Originally envisioned such a collection. Tn March,
l970, he sent the nOvella ''Fith Head of Ceberus'' to DanDn
Knight as his milford Conference story. Might ught it
for _bit.
rft Slepyan, o at that tirrB was an editor
at Charles Scribner's Sons, attended Milford,
ead ''Fifth Head,'' a told that if I ud
wite t more novellas to go with it, they
ld publish the th as a k. I ote '' 'A
StOry' by ohn V. Marsch'' and sent it to him,
and he sent me a cOntract, Then I wrote
v.R .T. " ( 3)
Onics, appaently, can inspire art.
The thr novellas share two con world5, Sainte
C0iX and Sainte mne., a cn chaacte, John v. Marsch,
a n 0estions at the nature of hwnanity, identit
and memOy. The fi5t novella is a comingf-age piece
ltten r the first-rson viewpoint of a young n known
Onl as yr ive. t5 settiq i5 a Frenchettled cit
t3imizon, on sainte croix. me grotes0e asphefe is
a Crs between the fictions of Gfaham Geene and ervyn
ae, a the plot evolves around ber Five's search fof
l9

himself amidst a world of clones. The second novella, "'A
Story} by John V. Marsch," is a myth about the natives of i is füfthef feplieated within the computer—·tuter, Mr_ Mil-
Sainte Croiius sister planet, Sainte Anne, as it has been § liO¤ Tall- hiQh‘ShO¤ldered, and sharp-chinned, the clgngs
reoonstructed by this minor character from the first form a Sl¤Qle race that never progresses. Number Five has
novella, The myth's protagonist is a twin in a world of the Same qenetic COmDOSiTliOl'l as his father, ie raised in
Shape-ehangers and his story is a puzzle. "V-R-T-," the i idehtieal $U1’FO¤hÖihQS, repeats his father's higtgry and
third novella, uses a collection of documents—— believes that the course of drug-·induced therapy that his
traneeriptions of tapes, notebooks and diaries--to trace father has ferced upon him has resulted in "the deetrucrion
Mal5·$,ch'5 anthropological tour among the shape—changers of of mY $elfr°° whatever kernel of individuality remaine in a
Sainte Anne and his subsequent imprisonment on Sainte Croix. pefaon Wheee hatilre and nurture replieate exactly his
The Fifth Head of Cerberus illustrates a number of father's (Ch. l, p. 62, FH). Nonetheless, Number E‘ive's
representative traits in Wolfe's fiction. It forms a cycle father is able to state that "we have our little variations"
ot stories, as do his “Island of Dr. Death" trilogy (TIOD), beeahee "Yeh ÖOh't knew how difficult it is to pfgvgnt spon-
the tour "Thag" stories (Continuum l, E, §_, and Q), and the taheehe diffefeheee" (Ch- l, p. 66, FH), We realize that
four-volume Book of the New Sun. It consists of novellas, a this stifling of differences causes the family's stagnation
form in which Wolfe excels: other novellas of a similar though Number Five does not realize it when he confronts his
calibre are "Tracking Song," Forlesen," and "Seven American father and Dr. Marsch in the elimactio soene_
Nights" (all in TIOD). It uses science—fiction models, such Number Five intends to kill his father arrer ne finds
as aliens and clones, to explore thematic issues of identity out why his father practices such self-destructive replica-
and humanity, and it uses ambiguity and lack of resolution tion- His father explains that it Eio continue the search
to express the complexity of those ambiguous and unresolv— for the reason for his family's stagnation. "We end at th'
able themes. level!" his father cries: 15
Because it takes the form of a reminiscence looking
back on a completed set of events and because its narrator After how many generations? We do not achieve
is a human being, the title novella provides the clearest fame or the rule of even this miserable little
and most straightforward vision of life on the Sister COlOhY planet- Something must be Changed, hat
planets of the cycle. But the questions the narrator raises what? (Ch. l, p. 67, FH)
are exceedingly complex: "I seek self-knowledge .... We _
wish to discover vfny we fail, why others rise and change and The famlllf Staqhates because it has lest rhs ability or the
we remain here" (Ch. l, o_ 72, Fh)_„ Nnmher Five hooes that will to change. Each generation duplicates the one before
the act or writing will unlock his memory and answer his aliowlhg he altefatieh in nature or nurture, and denying,
questions: while destroying through drugs, the existence of a third
human element, its individual essence or soul. Number Five
I haye written to disclose ynyself to myself, ano almost realizes the answer when he thinks, as his father
l am writing nw hscanss l will, l know, some- Speaks, of a dream he once had in which he and his aunt are
times read what I am writing and wonder. becalmed on his father's yacht.
Perhaps by the time I do, I will have
solved the mystery of myself; or perhaps I will I realized that the ship, as my aunt had said
no longer care to know the solution. (Ch. l, p, did not make headway or even roll, but remained
72, FH) heeled over, motionless. I looked back at her
and she told me, "It doesn't move because he has
'Ihough Number Five never discovers vfny his family stagnates fastened it in place until he finds out why it
and though, since the closing paragraph of the novella shows dOeSh°t move." (Ch. l, p, 40, ph)
him repeating his father's history, he himself does not Y
ohange. His story contains the answer. et hs does het Fealize that he has nearly {bund rhs sx-
Number Five, his brother, his aunt, his father, and Dlahatioh he seeks= such cyclic reasoninq beealms the s
hie grandfather, as well as countless slaves in the aé lt does the father- The story ends with Number Five soz?
marketplace, are clones of his great—grandfatheK, whose mind äémilng to YUV! his fathef'S hOUSe of prostitution, his ex-
20 , rlmehts, and his cloning of another generation of seekers.
i 2l
__ _ t
h ims' elf am idst a wo rld Of clOnes. Th e second novella, "A
Sto ,' by J n V. masch,'' is a th a bou t the natives oe
Sainte CrOix's sistef lanet, Sainte Anne, aS it haS been
econstruct ed by this minor chaacte fran the fist
n Ovel3a e myth's prOtagOnist is a twin in a wOrld oe
shape-chaners and his stO is a puzle, ''VR.T.'' the
thid novella, uses a collection of documents-
tfanSCltOn5 Of taeeS, nOtebOOkS an diarle5m-tO trace
manch's anthrolical ta1 ng the shape-changers of
Sainte An ne and his subs equ ent i mp ciso nt on Sainte Croix.
The tith Head Of Cerberus illustrates a n r 0
representative tait5 in Molfe's {iction It o rTE6 a cycle
of stories, as do his ''sland of , De ath'' tril oy (T0D)
the EOU ''ma9'' StOrieS (COntinU , 2, 3t and 4), and the
Our-vol k of the Mew Sun Tt consists of novellas, a
fo in which Mole excels othe novellas of a similar
calibre ae ''Taci ng ng ,'' Folesen,'' and ''Seven hne ican
Nights'' (all in TIO) t uses science-iction rrDd els, such
as aliens and clones, tO explore theTnatic issues o} ientity
an h nity, and it uses anb iguity and lack o resolution
to express the lexity Of those a mb iguous and unresolv-
able the s.
Be cause it takes the fO nn Of a eminiscence l cD king
ba ck on a c leted set Of events and be cause its na rrator
is a human being, the title novella provides the cleaest
and most strightEorward vision of life On the siste
planets of the cle. t the questions the narator aises
ae exceei rq ly c lex ''I seek self-kn l ed ge....
wish to discove wh y we fail, y othes rise and change a nd
m r in hee'' (Ch l, 72 Y ) M r FiVe hO 5 that
the act o witing will unlock his ne nD ry and ansm his
qu estions:
I have wr itten tO disclose y 5elf to myself, and
I am wT iting n a3 be cause T will, kn m, s aTe -
tis read what T an writing and q0nder
Perhaps by the tine do, I will have
sOlved the y ste ry of myself; or pe haps will
n longer cae to kn the solution. (Ch l, p
72, FH)
m ough M r Five neve discoves y his f ily stag tes
and though, since the clOsing paa9aph of the vella shS
him repeatin his father's histoy, he himself ds t
ch ange. His sto ry cOntains the ans r.
Y c Five, his bothe, his aunt, his father, and
hiS gandfather aS Well aS coUntless slaves in the
rketplace, ae clones o his geat randfather, wih % e mi
2O

_
, furth .eplicated within the c Omputer-tutOr, m. Mil-
on. Tall, hiqh-sh ou ldered, and sha rp -chinnedI the ClOneS
fo a sinle race that neve progresses. Y f Five has
the sa qenetic c OmD05iti On as hi5 fathef, S aS ln
;denticaL sur Oundings, repeats his athe's histOy, and
elieveS that the COrSe Of d9-indUCed therapV that hlS
fathe has fOrced u n him has resulted in ''the de5trUCtiOn
of my self,'' whateve kernel o individuality re ma ins in a
er5on whose nature and nuture eplicate exactly his
father's (Ch, l, p. 62, FH). OnetheleSSI MU FiVe'S
ather is able to state tnat ''we have Ou little valatlOnS'
cause ''you don't kn ax h dift-icult it is tO pevent S n-
taneous di-feences'' (Ch l, p 66, H). We ealie that
tis stiflinJ of differences causes the am ily's stagnati On,
thouqh N r Five ds not realize it when he cOnfOnts his
father and Dr. marsch in the clictic scene,
M Five intends to kill his fathe atte he Einds
out why his father practices sch sel est ru ctive eplica-
tion. His father explains that it is to continue the search
for the eson fO his f am ily's stagnati On. ''We end at this
levelt'' his ather cries;
Æ ter h anF ma ny geneations? We do not achieve
f or the le o even this miserable little
colony planet. S thing must be changed, but
what? (Ch. l, m. 67, FH3
me fily stagnates because it has lost the ability or the
will to chanqe. Each generation duplicates the oane be f Ore,
allaxing no ateration in nature or nurtue, and denying,
while destoying throuh dugs, the existence Of a thid
h n ele nt, its individual essence o soul. Y Five
almost realizes the answe when he thinks, as his fathe
speaks, T a dream he once had in which he and his aunt ae
cald on his ather's yacht.
T ealized tat the ship, a5 my aunt had 5aid,
did not make hea dw ay or even oll, but re ined
heele0d ove, tionless. T l oo ked ba ck at her
and she told , ''It d oe sn't ra ve cause he has
fastened it in lace until he find Out whY it
d Oe sn't ra ve.'' (Ch. l, p 40, FH)
Yet he does not realize that he has nearly found the ex-
Dlanation he seeks: such cyclic reasoninq becalms the 50n
aS lt d s the father. The story ends wit_h y r Five cOn-
tiUing to n his father's house of postitution, his ex-
tlnts, and his cl0ning of anothe generation Of seekers.
2l

We learn what Number Five does not: that identity is ‘ then etadnatiom
a matter not only of genes and environment, bht ef lOh@°S i We learn, also, that humanity resides in memory. When
soul as well- To OOVW the 5OUl ie an act O QVI aP‘ his father robs Number Five of his memories, he steals some
propriate to the address of Number Five.'s home, 666 Salt1m— Ä of the boy¤S hnmanity_ (hie memoir may tx an attempt to re-
banque Street. A "saltimbangue". is a showman. or a Store O; affim his humanity by restoring his memory.) Mr.
charlatan: the house of prostitution at 666 requires a Milliomg memo;-ies give him his emotional depth, and part of
ShOWman and a d€C€lV€[° to SUCCBEÖI and the €X{$r].l°TEÜt.at,10n the reason {0:* the S]_aVeS' inhumanity is their existence
with hUIT1al'l that takes place there KEGUIFGS a HIOKG Only in the present without Consciougnegs Of the past.
serious kind of trickster, one who meddles with the nature Hnmenity tnue eomorieee oetteiniy eommoniy Shared
of humanity. "666," from The Book Of Revellatil-Onstl ls tät experiencesz a sense of individuality, qualities of mind
number of the beast, of the Anti—Christ, and in ica es evi . end Sexuality emotion and memoty_
The evil at 666 Saltimbanque consistslof denying humanity by Memory ie a teeutrino theme in Gene wolfee work, and
attempting to foil its "little variatmns". and to stifle the here ae weil ae in many of hie etotiee__„Fotleeen„ (Hom,
development of individual self—hood, either by creating „Meny Meneionen (GNBD), Peace, end The Book ot the New Sun,
beings which have human shape but bestial character--like tot ex_amole__he uses an *—‘*‘"etehiteetnt of memoty_ There ie e
the clones which Number Five sees being sold in the slave mnemonie device in wnien one imaoinee a house ae completely
märk@t"“OI‘ _bY_ Stirling the experlencts ‘?“d mmrlts that as possible and then associates each detail of it with an
develop an individual soul, as Number Five s father does to item froh a body of knowledoe_ To imaoine the honee ie to
his $Oh· _ _ call up the body of knowledge; the house forms a metaphor
If hU“‘aVä·rY }S Purzoielä denletäat 666 Saltägäägglie for the information one wishes to retain. Houses also serve
Street, where eee lt reel e· ember we seems ““ _Y as metaphors for the mind (··1 aweii in possibiiity/a fairer
human, as we experience the events of the story through his house then otoee,„ eeye Emily Diekineon(4))_ It Should not
reminiscencesi He weg a htltllet bets? who playettvi be surprising, then, that Wolfe frequently describes houses
who f€‘ll ih OV€· en en a U O ln enger O r _ that evoke memory and describe minds. 666 Saltimbanque
father- Yet öS ä elene his ¢O“C€P}?iO“ was mO“StrOt‘5' U} a both a brothel and a laboratory, encloses sensuality and
way, and its intent, to duplicate his father exactly, denied eoienee_ It ie letoe enoooh thet Nnmoet Five, who otew no
his individual existence. And what of those clones ot the in it, eomee Uoon ettenoe oeeeeoee; hie exolotetioner both
father WhO failed, euch öS th? rOU}"°arm€d arachmd Slave W2? physical and mental, lead to unexpected discoveries. This
Shöreö Number FlV@°S faee? TheY re nor P€OPl€' am th€Y' particular house suffers from a gothic decrepitude with its
Phöédrlä aeke ee She walks Dfst a rormrul ef SlaV€S' "flaking parapet" and "shutter of twisted iron," which, "on
"Th€Y°r@ ä klhd ef ahlmal r€allY· a planet that has been inhabited less than two hundred
_ _ d d I years, seems so absurdly old" (Ch. l, pp. 3 and 37, FH).
FrOm Y“Y $t¤Öl9$ I was better lntorme ' an y Number Five's mind-—with its faulty memory, twisted reason-
told her that they hadbeen human as intanttstgltl ing, and recollection of youth from a great distance--seems
SOYHO Oäföes OVGÜ ee Chlldren er Old€r“ ee a the same. Oppressive as 666 Saltimbanque is, Number Five
they dlfferéd frem hO¤“äl _P€OPl9 <?"‘lY ee a must return to it as the seat of his existence, the only
result of surgery (some ot itnon their brainsi place where he can write "to disclose myself to myself,“
and ehemically induced alterations in their en though the house is, as we must suspect Number piVeS mind
deerme $Y$r€“‘S· (Ch· l' P' 52* FH) te be, "in a very confused state." They must be, because,
h be- b t d d artmals and the far from learning why his family never progresses, Number
They began as umah 1hQS U éh O UP aS_ l «_ Five ends his memoir repeating his father's history.
differehC@M$iihS te 119 ln bltalrl gilde erldoirlinss tääittsinnd ot 666 Saltimbanque is the spirit of place on decrepit
Mr. i ion is a compu er a C0¤ ö and stagnant Sainte Croix. A more mystical, natural, and
Number F1ve's great grandfather. 'Where the slaveshhälä Drimitive spirit of place pervades its sister planet, Sainte
amrgai mmdt hn hUmabt(;ebOdlt’?]·h“1r· Mnéläggeenoäoseshan most änhne. Rivers, groves of trees, and caverns, rather than ar-
min w an M meh Y· eh 9 $@9 _ ltecture ‘ 6 ···A sr ·· b an v. M h.·· Ma h
other characters in the story. He has emotions and he apoeeted twä;e(?mbriefly?r§;h el; geist näälicllal aersgn
teaches, a form of nurturlhg that @¤CO¤rä9@$ QFO‘^'th rather anthropologist from Earth who wants to discuss with Dr.
22 23
p p y
t3e learn what r Five does not; that identity is
a matte not ony Of aenes and enviroruTent, but of o's
s Oul as vell. To deny the soul is an act evil ap
promiate to the addess oE Nr Five's h, 666 Saltim
banque Steet. A ''saltimbanque'' is a sh Owman o a
chaclatan: the hOuse O postitution at 666 requires a
shanan and a deceive tO succeed, and the exrcrinentation
with human life that takes place there eauires a moce
seris kind o ticstec, one who neddles with Me nature
Of hlJmanity. ''666,'' fr The k of Revelations, is the
nr of the a5t, Of Me mtihist, nd indicates evil.
me evil at 666 Saltimbanque consists of denying hnity by
attting to Eoil its ''little vaiations'' and to stile the
develont Of individual sel-hood, eithe y ceating
beings which have human shape but bestial characte--like
the clOnes which Mr Five sees beiq sold in the slave
market--Or by stiting the expeiences and nDries that
develOp an inividual soul, as Nr Five ' s father does to
his son.
3f humanity is purposely denied at 666 53ltirque
Strt, Where ds it reside? N Five seems uneniably
hn, a5 We eXperlenCe the eVentS Of the stOy thrOugh hiS
reminiscenes. He was a litte boy who played, a young man
wO fell in lOve, and an adult Who in ange ovethrew his
ather. Yet as a cl One his conception was nDnstrous, in a
way, and its intent, tO duplicate his fathe exactly, denied
his individual existence And what of those clones o the
fathe O ailed, such as the ou-ad aachnid slave Who
haces Y Five's ace? ''mey're not ople, ae they?''
Phaedria asks as she walks past a oomful o slaves,
''mey'e a kind o animal eally,''
my studies I was ette inomed, and l
tOld her that they had been hwnan as infants--in
s cases even as childen or olde--and that
theY diffeed fran nocmal eo le onl as a
esult o surge (s ot it on thei bains)
and chemically induced alteatio in their en-
docine systems. (Ch, l, p 52, FH)
mey began as hn ings but ended up as anils, and the
di{eence seems to lie in bain and endocrine unction.
mr. million is a cute that contains the mind Of
Mumber Five 's 9reat grandather. Where the slaves ha Ve
aniTnal mind5 in hwnan ies, 1r. million encloses a h
mind in an inhwnan y, and he seerTG rrae human than St
othe chaactes in the story. He has emotions and he
teaches, a o o nutuing that encourages gaxth raer
22

t _ _
an sta9natl On
learn, also, that hnity esides in Men
hi's faer obs r Five OE his neraries, he steals saTe
of the bOyS hnitY. (His nenai nay an attet tO re-
store Or affi his hnity by estOrirq his ne.) mr.
mi'llion's rreraries give him his tional depth, and part of
the reason for the slaves' inhunity is their existence
only in the pesent without consci Ousness of the past
yumanity thus comprises cetainly commonly shared
eriences a sense of individuality, qualities of mind
a sexuality, eration, and .
ry is a recurirq therre in Gene olfe's work, and
hee as well as in many of his stOries--''Forlesen'' (TIOD),
"many mansions'' (BD), Peace, a me k o the w Sun,
for ele--he uses an achitectue Of mee is a
nic device in which o imagines a house as cletely
as sible and then asiates each detail of it with an
it fr a body oE kledge To imagine the house is to
call up the y of knmledge; the ha3se onT6 a netaphor
for the infotion one wishes to retain. Hses also seve
as taphors fo the mind (''I dwell in possibility/a fairer
hse than pe,'' says 'ly ickinsOn(4)). t should not
surising, then, that le fe0ently descis houses
at evoke rreraa and describe minds. 666 Saltimbanque,
both a brothel and a laboratory, encloses sensuality and
science It is large engh that M Five, whO grew up
in it, cs upon stange passages; his elorations, bOth
physical and ntal, lead to uxpected disveries mis
icular house suffers fran a gothic decepitude with its
flaking paapet'' and ''shutter of twisted ion,'' which, ''on
a planet that has been inhabited less than two hundred
years, s so absurdly old" (Ch , pp 3 and 37, FH).
Mr Five's mind-ith its aulty ne, twisted reason-
i, and recollection of youth fr a great distance
the same Oppressive as 666 Saltimbanque is, Mwnber ive
St return to it as the seat of his existence , the only
la where he can write ''to disclose ysel to myself,''
Ough the house is, as we m4st suspect Mr Five's mind
tO , ''in a ve confused state'' mey must , because,
fat {ran leaning y his f' ly never progresse5 , umber
Five ends his ir repeating his father'5 hi5to.
666 Saltimbanque is the spirit of place on decrepit
and Stagnant Sainte Croix. A re mystical, natural, and
Prlmitve spirit of place ades its sister planet, Sainte
m Rivers, groves o trees, and caverns, rather than a-
itecture, info "'A story," by 3on v. marsch." Marsch
aDeaed tice briefl in the first novella as an
anthropOlogi5t from Earth who wants to disss with .
23

Veil, Number E‘ive‘s aunt, her '°Veil's Hypothesis," that: servation be more or less truthful than this artistic
Observation? How can a person from one culture ever really
supposes the abos [the natives of Sainte Anne] understand another culture? If Marsch turns into his
to have possessed the ability to mimic mankind aborigine guide because that guide is a shape—changer (and
perfectly. Veil thought that when the ships that possibility is suggested in the third novella), then,
came from Earth the abos killed everyone and he may be practicing the ultimate and only act of cross-
took their places, so they're not dead, we [the cultural understanding.
Barth people, the human beings] are. (Ch. l, p. wolfe's tendency to raise rather than answer ques-
23, FH) tions, a tendency characteristic of his work but uncormxon in
science fiction, is one source of his evocative power. By
John Marsch uses Veil'S Hl/Pethesis and his om field work on i setting us to ponder questions, he evokes the sense of
Sainte Anne, described further in the third novella. to con- s wonder and wondering in us, beyond science-fiction's already
struct a myth of Sainte Anne's aborigines in the second powerful claim through imaginative speculation.
novella. The myth is the simulated artifact of a culture ; Though Wolfe says he knows little of Australian
whose existence has left little trace. Further, it deals aborigine culture, the Annese culture invites comparison.
with twin boys, dreams, and shape-changers: confusion is an The Annese are called abos, as the Australian aborigines are
integral part of the story. Who is who, who is human and called in derision. Like the Australian aborigines, the An-
who is a non-human native, what is dream and what is nese believe in a Dreamtime, a period both very long ago and
reality, what is truly Annese and what is Marsch's present now in the dream world, which explains the world and
fabrication? These questions make the story the most opaque affects it. For both the actual and the fictional
of the cycle. The questions are unanswerable and are meant aborigines, a magical and symbolic world explains and exists
to raise deeper and more universally applicable questions, alongside the "real" mundane world of facts. The Australian
Who is who? Initially, one needs to discover in what in- aborigines maintain a stone—age culture in a country with
dividuality consists. Are identical twins essentially the factories, airplanes. and satellite—spotting Stations. The
same being in two bodies or are they two identical but in- ( Annese have a culture even more ancient. While Wolfe was
dividual persons? Do people who fit exactly into their cal- planning this novella he had been
ture have unique personalities as well, or do they derive
their individuality solely from their roles within the — wondering which came first, tools or people. If
tribe? If the latter is the case, is it more true in primi- tools (which I believe is the currently accepted
tive cultures than in technological ones? In asking who is answer) then there was once a race of tool-using
human and who is not, one raises other questions as well: apes. lf people . . .(5)
of what does humanity consist and what is the human being's
responsibility to other species? Is a crime against The Annese abos of John Marsch's story represent a culture
humanity a crime when perpetrated against another species? wlüheht the capability to use tools, and we see them as in-
Is inter—species hostility any mare excusable than inter- telligeht but alien, primitive in a non-pejorative way.
racial hostility? Thle modern assumption of anthropology is shown here through
When the line between dream and reality is unclear, as I fletieh- 'Ihe technological gap between the Annese and the
it is in this novella and for its characters, one ponders h¤r¤an COl0¤iSts is wider than that between the Australians
the nature of the two states. Dreams affect an individual'S ahd the English colonists, for the Earth colonists of @
actions, and some believe that they can predict future ac- ( l.F1fth-Head ef Cerberue have möetefed Space !1feVel· However.
tions, but can dreams actually change actions in the waking ‘ the mröl gap between natives and colonists is much smaller
world? can they ooze out into real time? Do drearrs report than the teehnelegieal gap, ae the third nevella in the
the events of a world that exists simultaneously with, but I Cycle shows us.
Separately from, the waking world, as the Australian “V·R-T.," the third novella, consists of tape
aborigines believe? Marsch, the anthropologist, observes Ä transeriptione and diary entries, out of chronological
Sainte Anne. To what extent can we trust the observationß Sequehcer bOund together by infrequent narrative intrusions.
of another, whatever his credentials? The anthropologi5t The dlaflf entries are John Marsch's field notes as he and a
writes a story to explain Sainte Anne. Would scientific ob· b°Y whe may be an aborigine travel through Sainte Anne look-
24 25
Veil, Yr Five's aunt, her ''Veil's Hypothesis," that:
supes e a the natives of Sainte mJ
to have pOssess the ability to nu'mic nXind
pefectly Veil thought that when the ships
came from Eartn the abos killed eveo and
tk thei places, so they'e not dead, the
Earth le, the hn beings3 are. (Ch l, p.
23, FH3
dln marsch uses Vei's Hypothesis and his field k
Sainte Anne, descrid futher in the third vella, to a-
stuct a myth O Sainte Anne's aborigines in the se
nOvella, me yth is the silated ati{act of a culture
whOse existence has left little trace. Further, it deals
wi twin ys, dre, and sha-changers: confusion is an
intra pat of the sto. Mo is who, who is hn a
whO is a non-human naive, what is dream and what is
reality, what is tru.ly Annese and what is marsch's
fabrication? mese questions ke the sto the t 0e
of the cycle me questions ae unanswerable and are neant
tO raise deeper and nDre universally applicable questions
Mo is Who? Initially, o eds to discove in what in-
dividuality consists, e identical twins essentally the
sane bei in t bOdie5 or are they two identica but in-
dividual persons? Oele whoD fit exactly into their cul-
ture have unique pers Onalities as wel3, or do they derive
their individuality sOlely eran their roles within the
tribe? If the latter is e case, is it re te in primi-
tive cultures than in technological ones? In asking whO is
hn and who is not, one raises other 0estions as ll
of what d hurnanity consist and what is the hn ing's
respons=bility to other species? Is a crime agai.st
hnity a crirre when perpetrateda again5t another species?
Is inter-species hostility any rrure excusble an inter-
racial hOst= lity?
Men the l1ne betWeen dre and eality iS UnClear, aS
it is in this novella and for its characters, one pOnde
the nature of the two states, e4ns affect an individual'5
actions , and s believe that they can pedict future aC-
tions, but can dreanG actually change actions in the waki
wold? Can they ze out into real ti? dean6 ek
the events of a world that exists simultaneously wi, t
sepaately froIn, the waking world, as the Australia
aborigine5 believe? sch, e anthropologist, obSerVeS
Sainte Anne. To what extent can e trust the obseVati0M
of another, whatever his credentials7. The anthopol OgiSt
wTites a sto to eqlain Sainte Anne Mould scientific
24

_p0æb0y
fvatiOn be e Of leSS tUthfUl than thi5 ati5tiC
eation? H Can a SOn t One CUltUe eVe eally
derstand anOther cultUe? If marsch tuns intO his
igine gu ide be CaUSe at 9u ide iS a sha -Changer (and
,t ssibility is suggested in the third vella), then,
e y practicing the Ultimate a Only act Of crOss-
ultual undestandin9.
h7olfe's tendency tO raise rathe than answer 0es-
tions, a tenden CharaCterl5tlC Of hS WOk bUt Un anD n ln
science fiCt On, iS One 50UrCe Of hlS eV OC atiVe r.
getting u5 tO pOnder qUeStl OnS, e evOkeS the Sense Of
a r a wo ndei r9 ln US, yOnd SClenCe-fiCt OnS already
rful claim thrgh imaginative speculati On.
Though Wolfe says he knows little of Australian
eborigine cultue, the Se cUlture invte5 anpa ri50n
me mnese are called a , as e Austalian arigines are
call in derisiOn. Like the AU5tralian abori9ine5 the m-
se lieve in a eamti, a peri th ve lOng agO and
pesent n ax in the dre am wOrld, ich e q lains the wOld a nd
affects it. FOr bOth the actual and the ictiOnal
erigines, a magical and s ymbo lic wold eqlains and exists
alongside the ''real'' ndane wOld O facts. m e Australian
aborigines maintain a stOne-age culture in a cOunt with
factories, ai lanes, and satellite-s tting statiOns. m e
m nese have a culture even nD re ancient. t3h ile lfe was
planning this novella he had been
nderin9 iCh C ane fir5t, t l5 Or Pe Ople If
tls (which T believe is the currently accepted
ans we r) then there was once a race of t l-using
apes. f le.. .(5)
me mnese as of John Marsch's sto epsent a lture
WiOut the capility to use tls, and we see th as in-
telligent but a1ien, primitive in a non-pejoative way.
m iS nDd en a55 tion of anthro l is sh mn hee thr gh
fiCti On. Th e technol ical gap be tween the An nese a nd the
h n lOnist5 is wider than that tween th e Austalians
and the English coloni5ts, or the Ea rth lonists of e
ith Head of cer ru s have stered space travel. H e er,
e al gap betmen natives and colonist5 i5 much Sller
than the technological gap, a5 the thid novella in the
Cleshms us.
V.R.T,'' the third novella, con5ists of tape
transciptions and dia ent,ies, out of chronologi
enCe, bOu nd t ether by infre qu ent nafative int ru sions.
me dia enties are John marschis fi
O y be an a bo rigine travei though sainte Ann e l k-
25

ing for evidence of its natives. (Since the Ahhese use no Each consci0uSneSS intrudes upon the other in this
toole, there is little evidence of their eXiSte¤¢e am} What monologue. The anthr0p0logist‘s understanding of his sub-
there ie i5 inconclusive.) The tZ‘ä¤SCfiPtlO¤$ FQCOVÖ lm?€F‘ ject has become--whether through study, madness, or shape-
ylewg between Marsch and the government officiale wh? have changing-——nOt only empathy, but mimicry or actual ab3orp—
imprisoned him on suspicion of spying and the murder ot I}]\_1m—— tion. He has become his subgect, ‘ I
ber Five's father. The narrative, which is, set off by , John Marsch seeks to discover the true. identity of the
italics and comprises only a small and widely dispersed part ' aboriginal race, asking first whether it exists at all, and
of the novella, follows an officer of the Sainte Croix then, if it does, whetherit retains its original form. But
prison as he spends a hot night sifting through the his problem is insoluble if the aborigines can change shape.
notebooks and tapes that form the evidence in Marsch‘s case. Rather than discovering a single truth about the aborigines,
The narrative thread evokes the same decayed, sordid, and Marsch loses the truth of his own identity. His loss makes
steamy atmosphere of the first novella: the officer reacts us wonder. Can a person adopt a new cultural identity by
with casual violence to the night‘s interruptions——a slave, imitation? Can anyone have a personal identity if he loses
a cat, a bird--and copulates with the slave Qifl whltle he his cultural one? n ,
absent—mindedly sorts through the disorderly box of evidence The questions these novellas raise, their purposeful
in Marsch‘s case. The evidence reveals that Marsch has come ambiguity, show us how complicated the nature of identity
to an ettitude as indifferent as the OffiCe§‘S tower? the is, but speculative fiction makes it possible to explore the
possibility of release from interminable imprisonment in an complications in a concrete way. Wolfe uses speculative
Underground maZQ_ _ fiction to externalize the search for self. Finding one's
The transcriptions and diaries lead us to believe that Self is usually a tloure of Speech, but the ohat-aotel-S in
Marsch‘s voice actually contains two consciousnesses——h1s The Fifth Head of Cerberus actually go searching for self in
om and that of the boy, V.R. Trenchard. When the boy dies a concrete way, in a concrete physical environment. When we
half—way through his trip with Marsch, it seems that his describe a person who adopts a new culture by saying he
consciousness joins Marsch's. Or, V.R.T. has changed from turns into a member of that culture, we don't mean it
his own shape, which is now that of someone dead, to literally——but an actual physical transformation can take
Marsch‘s more viable one. Or Marsch, the dedicated place in science fiction. The Fifth Head of Cerberus ex-
anthropologist, has taken on the consciousness of his sub- ploits science-fiction's potential to turn metaphors into
ject in a kind of schizophrenia brought on by cultural actual events.
shock, isolation in the wilderness, and imprisonment. The The Fifth Head of Cerberus is quite a different, thing
result of this joining is as strange and fragmented as the from yration ARES. Where yration ARES gave political
form of the novella: answers to material problems, The Fifth Head of Cerberus ex-
plores questions raised by more abstract and universal
At least half of me is animal .... I do not problems. Where Wolfe used a flat, seemingly objective and
really speak out like others, but only make cer- straightforward style in Operation ARES, he has used not
tain sounds in my mouth——sounds enough like only several kinds of storytelling but several perspectives
human speech to pass the Running Blood ears that 1n The Fifth Head of Cerberus to relate its much less
hear me .... straightforward visions.
This cell is beneath the cathedral floor To get at his questions of identity and memory,
itself, and since they bury the dead in lthat humanity and culture, Wolfe tries first a formal narrative,
floor, with their gravestones paving the aisles Second a reconstruction of a cultural artifact, and third a
and pews, the graves are above U16, and it MY be Colleetien of documents. In historical and anthropological
my own that they are digging; there, Onee I am wrltlhg, the difficulty of writing truth (the actuality of
Safely dead, they will say masses fOr me, the €‘V€¤tS and cultures) has long been recognized, and those
distinguished scientist from the mother world. Säme three techniques have been employed to arrive at some
It is an honor to be buried in the Cathedral: ' hlnd ef truth. Truth, it it Can be told, may be held in an
but I would wish instead a certain dry cave high Interface among the three kinds of storytelling.
in one of the cliffs that overlook the river. Wolfe uses three perspectives to make his exploration
(Ch, 3, pp. 219-220, FH) as well- The first novella is a memoir, looking back on
26 27
ing for evidence of its natives. (Since the An nese use
t ls, there is little eviden ce ot- heir existence and wht
there is is inconclusive) m e tanscciptions re d inter-
vie ws be t we en Ma rsch and Ul e gOve nt Oficials whO have
imp' rison ed him on suspici On oE spyi q and th e rde ot Y wn -
ber Five's father. The nacrative, which is set Oft by
italics and c anp rises only a s ma ll and widely dis pe rs ed pa t
Of the novella, fOllows an oEficer Of the Sainte Coix
pisOn as he spends a hOt night sifting thrOugh the
n Ote bOo ks and ta pe s that fo the eviden ce in ma rsch's case.
The narative thread evOkes the s ane decayed, sordid, and
steamy a tnD sphee o the fist nOvella: the office reacts
with casual violence to e night's inteccuptions--a slave,
a cat, a bid--and pulates with e slave girl while he
sentindedly sorts rOugh e disordecly x of eviden
in Ma rsch's ca5e. m e evidence reveals that ma sch has c
to an attitude as indifferent as the oftice's tad e
pOs sibility of elease inteinable iriso nFre nt in an
undegound ma 2e.
m e transcriptions and diaies lead us to be lieve that
masch's voice actually contains t consciousnesses--his
axn and that o the boy, V.R Trenchad When the y dies
half-way through his tip with Marsch, it see n6 that his
nsci Ousness jois Fb rsch's Or, VR.T. has changed fr an
his own shape, which is n ax that of someone dead, to
Mafsch's more viable one. O masch, the dedicated
anthrOpO3ogist, has taken On the corsciousness of his sub-
ject in a kind of schizophrenia bought on by cultural
shock, isolation in the wilderness, and iris nt. me
esult of this joinirq is as strange and fra gTre nted as e
fo of the novela:
At least half of is anil. . , . I do not
eally 5 pe ak t like othes, but only ke ce-
tain sounds in my mouth--sounds enough like
h luna n s pe ech to ss the Running Bl eas that
hear ...
mihis cell js beneath the cahedral fl
itself, and since they bu ry the dead in that
f , wi th their gravestones pa ving the aisles
and WS, the 9raVeS are a bo Ve l and lt ma y be
ny am that they are digging; th ere, once I
Safely dead, they Wll Say ma SSeS Or , the
distiuished scientist fran the mot,her world
Tt is an hono to be buri ed in the cathedal
but I woud wish instead a certain dry cave high
in one of the clifs that overlook the river.
(Ch 3, pp. 2l9-22D FH)
26

___ _
Each cOnsCiOUsneSS lntUde5 upOn the Other 3n thiS
le. me anthlist's understanding Of his s-
ect has be care-ether thrOugh study, dness, o shape-
chaing--nOt OnlY eathy, but mimic Oc actual absOrp-
tm. He has hiS SubjeCt
ohn Masch seeks tO discover the te identity of the
riginal race, asXing irst whether it exists at all, and
then, if it ds, whether it etaiM its Oiginal fO, t
ht poblem is insOluble if e arigis can change shape.
ther than dl5cOVerln9 a Sln9le truth at the abo39ineS,
sch les the tth Of his mn identity His l Oss kes
us nder, Can a pe50n adqt a new cultucal identity by
imitation? Can anyOne have a sOnal identity if he les
is cultural One?
The questi Ons these novellas raise, their puqoseful
iity, shax us h licated the natue of identity
i's, but speculative icti On makes it sible to explore the
complications in a cOncrete way lfe uses speculative
fiction to extenali2e the search for self Finding one's
self is usually a figue of speech, but the characters in
m_e Fifth Head of Cerberus actually go searching fo self in
a COnCete Way, ln a COnCrete RhySiCal enVlrOnt. Men we
descibe a persOn whO adopts a new cultue by saying he
turns into a member o that culture, we don't mean it
liteallyDut an actual physical transfomation can take
place in science fiction. me Fifth Head of Cerberus ex-
plOits science-iction's pOtntial to turn metaphors into
actual events.
me Fifth Head o Cerbeus is quite a diffeent thing
fr 00rati On ARES. Mere 0Doration ARES gave political
answers tO terial proble, me Fifth Head of Cebes ex-
lOes questions aised by moe abstract and universal
Prl. Mere lfe used a fJat, seemingly objective and
Staightfoward style in O atio ARES, he has used not
OlY several inds of storytelling but 5everal perspectives
i The Fifth Head f Cerbeus to e3ate its much less
StaightfOrward vi5ions.
TO get at his questions of ientity and memory,
hnity and cultue, lfe ties first a fol naative,
SeCOnd a reconstruction o a cultural atifact, and third a
COlleCti On of docwcents. Tn histoical and anthrlogical
ltlng, the difficulty of witing truth (the actuality o
eVentS and cultue5) has long been ecnized, and those
S thcee techniques have been eqloyed to aive at 5
ind of tn1th. Tth, f it can be told, y held in en
teace ng the three kinds of stofytelling.
WOlfe uses thcee sctives to Tnake hi5 eloation
aS Well. The ficst novei, is, r, lk;ng back on
7

events which occurred in the historical past- "A StOFY ···" ("The Island of Dr. Death and other gtorie ·· T
occurs in dreamtime, the time when myths and magic coincided Changers ("The Chenge]_j_ng,· GNBD) and a int ICD), 1
with and gave structure to physical reality? the POWOFS of of A¤C@S!Z0fS," IF, June 1968). I All ij-1;3;€;;ääi_e;
dreamtime can be called up into the present by retelling the ether — · · „
myths, for mythic past and mundane present exist simul— _ tog I powerfullyl ln '
taneously. In "V.R.T." there is the present moment of re- Q NOTES
corded conversations and the journalistic immediate past,
occurring without resonance or reflection. Again, a true (1) Orbit 10 (New York: Putnam 1972)
understanding of the worlds of The Fifth Head of Cerberus (2) rron, "Gene Wolfe:] The Fifth Head of
exists in the multiple perspectives of history, myth, and berus," Anatcm or Wonder ‘——%—·—*
itmßdiähw d d th' d ll f Th F'fth H d f wö, Tl—l—i (New York. Bowkerl (
e secon an ir n0ve as O 6 I Ga O (3) Letter from Gene Wolfe ·
y have been written as something of an after- (4) Emily Dickinson, „I DNet;)lJ?:nP§;;?§?ii§e§°(iééi
thought, it is true. And it might be argued that the title yd Th (
novella, the original one, is the best of the three. Cer— J°h¤SO¤ (Boston: Little, Brown 1951; e . 327om
tainly, it is the clearest, partly because of its cloning (5) Letter from Gene Wolfe to Joan Gordon ,F§b 24 l*
metaphors work convincingly at both literal and metaphorical ' ' ’ ‘
levels and partly because its evocation of place is the most
vividly handled through Number Five's Proustian narration.
However, the real strength of The Fifth Head of Cerberus
lies not in the strength of each individual novella but in
the way the three form a larger entity as a cycle. Three
narrative styles, three perspectives, three stories form one
multifaceted vision. They have many nodes of connection:
they take place in the same solar system and the two worlds
share political, anthropological, and sociological
assumptions; certain images, such as the silver trumpet
vine, reappear; and they deal with the same themes--humanity
and humaneness, identity, and xremory. They are also linked
by some mysterious, perhaps meaning.less but nevertheless
intriguing repetitions that establish minor but compelling
harmonies as one reads one story with the echo of the others (
still reverberating. The letter V is such a curiosity-—Dr.
Veil, V as the Roman numeral of 5, stories by Vernor Vinge
in the Port—Mimizon library, John V. Marsch, V.R.T.
In these attentions to stylistic details, as well as
in his handling of complex issues in complex ways and in the
grace with which he introduces information about his new
worlds, Wolfe shows that Fifth Head of Cerberus is the work
of a mature and controlled artist. Five years passed be-
tween Operation ARES and "The Fifth Head of Cerberus";
during that time Gene Wolfe grew more skilled not only in
writing but in recognizing the forms, themes, and motifö
best suited to his particular talents. He worked exten·
sively with short stories and novellas, examining themes of
identity ("The Toy Theater," TIOD), memory ("Remembrance CO
Come," Orbit 6, ed. Knight), and humanity ("Eyebem," Orbit
Z, ed. Knight); and using motifs such as the lonely DOY
(
28 29
__ _ ____
events Which cuced in the histoical past, ''A Sto... "
curs in deamtine, the ti when yths ard magic coincid
with and gave stn1cture tO physical eality; the n ot
dnantine can be called up into the pesent by ret' elling the
mytht , for mythic past and mundane peset exis simul
taneOusl. n "V.RT.'' there is the pesent nt o re
corded conversations and the journalistic idiate past,
curirq without resonance Or reflection. Aga=n, a true
undestanding Of the worlds o The Fiftr Head of Cerbes
exists in the nultiple perspectives of history, myth, and
0 0 ia.
The second and thid novellas of Te Fifth Head o
Cernts y have been witten as something of an afte-
thght it is true md it might be agu2d that the title
vella, the origin3l oe, is the st of the three. Cer-
tainly, it is the cleaest, partly because o its cloning
netaphOrs rk cOnvincingly at bOth literal and taphoical
levels and partly because its evocation of place is the st
vividly handled thOugh M Five's Poustian naFration.
HOwever, the real strength o The Fifth Head of Cers
lies nOt in the streqth Of each individual novella but in
the way the three fo a larger entity as a cycle. mr
narative styles, three rspectives, thee stoies o o
ltifated vision. mey have many nodes of connection:
they take place in the sanc solar system a the two worlds
share pOlitica, anthropological, and sociological
assumpti Ons; certain images, such as the silver tt
vine, reappear; and they deal with the sane thes--hnity
and hneness, identity, and mey are also lied
by s Ome mysterious , perhaps meaningless but nevethe1ess
intriguing repetitions that establish mirar but compelling
hanies as one reads one story with the echo of the others
still everbeating me letter V i such a curiity--,
Veil, V as the Rn nra o 5, stories by Vernu Vinge
in the POrtimizon library, John V marsch, V.R,T.
In these attentions to stylistic details, as well as
in his handling of clex issues in lex ways and in the
gra with Which he introduces infoation about his new
rlds, Wolfe shms that Fifth Head of Cerberus is the rk
O a mature and contolled atist. Five years passed be'
tween 00erati On ARES and ''The Fifth Head of Cerberus ''
durirq t at tlrTe Gene lfe gew re skiled not only in
writing but in ecognizing the onn5, thes, and tif5
st suited tO his pacticular talents. He workec1 exten-
sively with short stories and novellas, exaninirq thes O
identitv (''me Tay meater,'' TIOD), (''Rerance tO
Cane,'' bit 6, . Might), and hnity (''e,'' bit
7, ed Kg ; and using motifs such as the lonely_bOY
28

__
("The Island O D, ath and her Stories,'' TIOD),
changes (''me Changeling,'' BD), and achitecture (
of AncestOrs,'' IF, June l968) All these studies
tether, pax efully, in _The Fifth Head ot^Cerbe s.
M0T ES
(l) Orbit lO (M York: PU tn am , l972).
(2) _Meil BarOn, ''Gene MOlfe; _The Fifth Head of
be s,'' _at y o Wonder (Mew York: ker,
p. 276.
(3) Le tter f ne Wolfe to J aa n don, Feb. 24,.
(4) ily Dickinson, ''I ell in Psibility'' (#657
Com0lete POems of Emil Dickinson, ed. Thom
Jo ns on ( Bos ton Litt e, Br am , 0 l), p. 27.
(5) Le tter f ne Wolfe tO oa n rdon, Feb.24, l!
29

V helpful to our understanding of Peace lies in the
flexibility that the mainstream label allows in interpreting
the narrator's situation. Wolfe keeps his narrator's
gig pi-ecise situation ambiguous. Perhaps the old man narrates;
jf so, he is casting back in time, either literally, com-
; mhnicating with his younger selves, in which case this is
, . .f h Science fiction, orfiguratively, through the alteration of
_ In_ 197% after eubllshlne mored tgjgqolfligg ifiä; his memories, in which case it is not science fiction. Per-
st°r}es_ ln Seleneeiletlon megezmee an og- ' E- haps instead, the novel is narrated by the middle-aged Weer;
Pnbllsnlng two b¤<>*<·_l@¤¤th works deslenated es Science IC: if this is so, either he knows his own future, in which case
tlonr and after maklng a nalne fon himself es a Sclence the novel is science fiction, or he imagines his future, in
fiction writer's science—f1ct1on writer, Gene Wolfe produced which case it is not Nevertheless whether Peace is
a mainstream novel. Peace did not make a big splash: it . . . ° . . .’ . . —+—e
did not go beyond its first hardback printing until. l9§2, igäggxllaaää/je fiction or not, it is fiction which invites
when it was reissued in paperback as Wolfe‘s popularity 1n— Th 1 „ h, h 1 h _
_ · - 1 e specu ation w ic a lows t e most Isymbolic
Creased wltn . It recelved On-Y a resonance is that Peace 1S narrated by Weer as a middle—aged
few modest reviews, though one was in the New York Times . ?
_ . man suffering some kind of mental breakdown caused by over-
Book Review. Nevertheless, Peace is a beautifully written work and loneliness His memoir is largely a response to
and artfully complex novel that. shows thereiis little,or no the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) which his doctor
difference between mainstream fiction and science fiction as decides to administer when Weer Visits Dr Van Ness to ask
Preetleed bY Gene welfe° gg Unites. Wolsels mst n for advice on treatment of the stroke he will have in the
ääemas gif meläory'oflssiäitlagicsngiläeJbictlonmgéähajgoägiä future. Detecting something amiss in Weer's question, the
eme' e na ure ’ doctor runs a series of psychological tests In the TAT
· · · ‘ ' ‘ f f . . .' ’
llnpoetant ln nie leser work' lt Jolns them m the- Om O a the doctor shows the patient a series of pictures and the
fictional memoir with embedded stories, a form which serves . . . . .
. · ~ _ patient tells stories inspired by the pictures. The
as a character study of its narrator at the same time it ex patiemfs responses reveal his Psychological State.
Pleres the nature af fietiom . U Each question Dr. Van Ness asks triggers a long and
_ W Tne navi} trijiß uéhinäliiczfneätinniiiiäiäghiädiqtägg detailed set of memories. He asks Weer his age, and the
nls eer' as e gr _ . . . story of Weer's fifth birthday follows. The doctor insis-
Of CaSSl°nYllle' OnlO' e quiet Mläwesteljn towm eäittgnréhä tently calls Weer back from his reverie, gives him advice
east' set ln a place wn1en' tnoug lmagmerw Set tsiäe regarding his future stroke, and Weer falls into a reverie
Kesent typleal emall_tqwn emeHCa' läiäiseems qugle set as again, beginning with the beautiful meditation on the
the Venne Olésclence fletlcénl, the dejclelgnisgbäu lähelonly "Simulated stag" and wending its way through the Christmas
malnstream letlen seems O Vlens an 1n_V I after his fifth birthday and a story the maid Hannah had
strangeneea ¤¢C¤rS_ ln the embeddeclsterles end ln the Ode- told him. These first two reveries are relatively short,
ness of Alden Dennis Weer's perceptions. Bat the sametould each Only a few pages long.
be Said GE mllle Changellngw "Tnree Million aware MlleS’ Then Dr. Van Ness introduces the TAT. "Turn over the
and ··The island of Dr. Death and Other St¤r1@S·" all Pub" first Card, Teil me who the people are and what they are
ljshed in gcience-fiction äl’1thOlOQi9$· WG See eben hw ar- doing" (Ch, 1, p, 40, P), The mere suggestion elicits
bjtpary, inconsistent, afld Llüféll-able the dlVlsl(?n between S9ven{;y—th;—g€ päggg gf Wg9[·'5 memgriggg Chapter Two,
mainstream and science fiction, or speculative fiction, can q uolivian, This Section Covers the first part Of young
be. Wolfe tried to break into the more cr1t1cally—apprOVed weeps Stay with his aum her three Suitors and two em_
_ . · _ I I
and potentieily more lucratlve world Gf malnstreem Pnn bedded stgrieg, when the doctor finally manages to inter-
]_j_5hing with Peace, but fOr several y€äl€S, ät least, the mpt, Chapter Three, „The Alchemistn, begins. The doctor
novel suffered the fate of most first novels. Though th1S takes this Opportunity to warn Weer Of the dangers Of Over
was not Wolfe‘s first novel, Harper and ROW Called Be-E-e Werk and shows him the first TAT card, which pictures a
such, and for the readership at which it aimed, it was. wdman Or addescent boy handing Something to someone else.
we een assnme that greed ana ehe urge for fame were weel“°S response begins with his aunt's Chinese Story,
not the only reasons for Wolfe‘s decision. A reason more
3l
30
_ ______ _
V
PEACE
In l975, after publishing more than fifty short
stories in science-ficti On nagazines and antholagies, after
publishi two book-length works desiated as scien fic-
tion, and after making a na f Or himself a science-
{iction iter's science-fiction write, Gene lfe pruced
a insteam novel. ace did not make a big splash it
did not go yond its irst hardback printing until l982,
wen it was eissued in papecback as Molfe's p0pularit in-
creased with The Bo0k of the Mew Sun. It nceived only a
few modest reviews, thOugh one was in the Mew York Tines
k Review Mevertheless , Pean is a aut_iully wTitten
ad artfully clex novel that sh thee is little or no
diffenn tween instream fiction and science fiction as
practiced by lfe Pace unites Wolfe's st n
themes of memory, isOlatiOn, and rejection with anOther
th, the nature of ti, which will be Tan and rae
important in his late work It joins in the fo of a
fictional ir with embedded stories, a Eo which serves
as a chaacter study of its narrator at e sa tine it ex-
plores the nature of fiction.
me vel tras the lie of its narrator, Aden Den-
nis er, as he grs up and becs an established citizen
of Cassi Onville, OhiO, a quiet Midwestern t Set in the
aast, set in a place ich, thgh iginary, sms to rep-
resent typical anall-tam Anerica, Pean se quite tside
the venue of science iction; the decision to publish it as
inste fiction see obvis and inevitle , The onl
strangeness curs in the edded storjes and in the odd-
ss of Nden nnis Mr's perceptions t the s could
be said of ''me Changeling,'' ''mr Million qare Miles,'
and ''The Island of Dr ath and Other Stories,'' all p-
lished in science-fiction anthologies. We see then h ar-
bita, inconsistent, and unreliable the division between
instre and science fiction, or 5peculative fiction, can
. lfe tried to beak into the rrDre critically-approved
and potentially more lucrative orld of mainstre pub-
lishing with Peace, but or sevecal years, at least, the
novel suffered the fate o{ t first novels. mough thiS
was nOt Wol{e's first novel, Harper and Row called _Peace
such, and for the readership at which it airrRd, it was
Me can assume that greed and the urge for anR were
not the only reasons for le's decision. A reason e
3O

_ _ _ ,
helpful tO Ou understanding of Peace lies in the
f3exibility that the mainstream label alls in interpreting
narratOr ls situati On. ' l
precise situati On aTnbigus. Perhaps the old man narates;
if sO, he iS CaStin9 back in ti, either literally, -
municating with his ynger selves, in wich case this is
cience ficti On, Or figuatively, 0ugh e alteration Of
his ries, in which case it is not science fiction. Per-
haps instead, e nOvel is narrated by the middle-aged Meer;
if this is so, either he kns his mn future, in wich caee
the novel is science fiction, or he imagines his future, in
hich case it is nOt evertheless, whether Peaa is
speculative fictiOn Or nOt, it is fiction which invites
sculati On .
The speculati On which allows the most symbolic
nsonance is at Pace is narated by Weer as a middle-aged
n su{erirq s ki of ntal breakdam caused by over-
rk and lOneliness. His ir is largely a response to
the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) which his docto
decides to a&ninister when Weer visits Dr. Van Mess to ask
for advice on treant of the stroke he will have in the
future tecting sthing amiss in Weer's 0estion, the
tOr ns a seies of psycholical tests , In the TAT,
the dOctor sha5 the patient a series of pictures and the
patient tells stOries inspired by the pictures. The
patient's esnses reveal his psychological state.
Each questiOn Dr. Van Mess asks tiggers a long and
detailed set Of memories, He asks Meer his age, and e
stO of Weer's ith birthday follaxs. me dtor insi5-
tently calls Mee back fr his reveie, gives him advice
rarding his future stroke, and Meer falls into a reverie
again, beginning with the beautiful meditation on the
simulated stag'' and wending its way ough e Christmas
after his ifth birthday and a story the id Hannah had
tOld him. mese first two reveries ae relatively short
e Only a few pages long.
men . Van Mess intoduces the TAT. ''Turn over the
fist d. Tell ne who the people are and what ey are
dOing'' (Ch. l, p. 40, ). The mere suggestion elicits
SeVenty-three page5 of eerls memoies.. Chapter TWo,
Olivia. '' Thi section covers the fist part of youn
er's stay with his aunt, her three suitors, and t% e
dded st0ries. n3hen the doctor finally manages to inter-
t, Chapter mree, l'me Alchemist,ll be ins. The doctor
tes this qportunity to wan weer of the danges of ove-
k and shms him the first TAT card, which pictures a
n Or adolescent y handing sthing to sone else.
Meels response begin5 with his auntls ch;ne5e s
3l

evolves into another Of his childhood birthday parties at of a Joe in managememö WOlf€ was senior editor Of plant
which Julius Smart tells a story, and then goes on to tell , where he “edite, buys Some twonty_flVe 5;;
Smart's story. Over forty pages later, Dr. Van Ness offers lanced articles a year, and writes a major cover story every
a second card, "a figure writes at a table, another peers few mOnthS·"(_3)_ Tha fsspcnsibility of this full-time
over his shoulder," and Chapter Four, "Gold," is evoked into ma¤aQ@m@flt_PQS{tlO¤, combined with personal and artletlc
being (Ch. 4, p. 166, P). This chapter describes the book- responsibilities, must have weighed heavily at times, but
forget. Gold, ae well as a ohlldhood ohost story and another wolfe can relieve SOI'09 of the pressure through the practice
ghost story which Gold has written. of his art. Wolfe does not permit such a release to Weer
At the beginning of Chapter Five, "The President," the Who manages a Plant that manufactures ersatz Orange juj_Ce_
doctor calls a temporary halt to the test and Weer returns Isolated, lonely, and overworked, Weer imagines hirrself
to (jdn Office the One he uses as the President Of unstuck ln tllney a of Kurt VOnn€gUt'S
the orange juice plant and its reproduction in the old man‘s · Wear: in his forties, believes that he
house). Weer misses his next appointment with the doctor, is also living as an old man, sixty or more, paralyzed by a
at which Van Ness would have outlined his conclusions about stroke, and alone in a huge house furnished with rooms that
Weer‘s mental state, and the novel ends. We must draw our recreate his memories. The isolation in rooms of memory
own conclusions. Weer is suffering from overwork, guilt, (Where he frsquently becomes lost) and the malady that
loneliness, and a sense of lost opportunities. He has dif— cripples his ability to conmunicate are imagined physical
ficulty forming close relationships, especially with women, situations that symbolize Weer's mental condition.
Obsessed by his past, he provides himself with a future that _AlÖa¤ Dennis Weer wanders through the rooms of his
will isolate him from everything except his Own memOrisS- memer1eS' either lit€rallY OF figllfatively, attempting te
This view of the novel‘s situation allows us to see it 1aY _th€ QhOStS of his past by reealling it, just as the
as the richly developed character study of a man who shares Stones hs Vemembafs USG ghosts to combat the tellers feare
much with Gene Wolfe: of them. By grasping and shaping his memories, Weer hopes
to earn peace for- himself, to come to terms with the death
Weer is a man very much like me——I don‘t mean Of Bobbi} Bleckr W]-th hl-5 love for his Aunt Qlivia (Olive
that hho same things have hsooened to me, but branches signify peace) and for Margaret Lorn, and to
that we have similar souls.(l) dleeevem
Like his character, Gene Wolfe was an only child: whet went wrong?  · · When I recall my
childhood, and forget (as I sometimes do) every~
It‘s a wonderful and terrible thing——terrible thmg elser it is Qüiila Clear what my life was
beoause one ends ub beine the last of the tri-be, to become. I was intelligent and industrious;
the only one who Kemembefs the Customs and Margaret and I loved one another deeply. I
teachings of the now·sunken land of Home .... wO‘:‘ld_“‘arKY herr and enjoy a career that, if ngt
I am the Only Ong left, [hg Only thing ]_9ft; briilllantl would at 19öSt DG ]_OCa]_]_y digtin-
l had to, l Could not orove lt was not all a guished .... None of this happened. (Ch. 4
dI.eam_(2) }_)p 2].5*2].6, P) I
wos! lives ln lsolshlon from his land Oe hOmo_ Rssoonslhle éiohls exploration of his memories could show him what went
for another Childls death, the young Amen is lsolstsd from Gangs}; fhalmlght find peace. .But we never learn why his
much Of his Small townls Society as well. Later, man hsnle finds al sd; why he never married Margaret, and Weer never
eight or nine years old, his parents go to Europe, leaving nOvalSpe§ee' Hls m€mO1L‘ ends unresolved, 35 livgsr not
him behind with his aunt. As he grows older, the adults wh0 an O·
populated his youth die, their houses disappear, the town oollecoough Uhfssalvsd, W@sr's memoir is ngt e fol-mless
changes, and eventually he becomes the last of his tr1b@· I desi lgn Of mt€F1al_ bllt an artfully rrblded Construction
His memories, altered by time, experience, and character, l oollgcnte t° flarlflf its narrator's character, The novel
take on the flux and unreality of dreams. Old sskweef S_ most Vltal mamries- In Chapter Fear, the
Wolfe shares something else with Weer——the pressursö ' le Weer mtaffllpts the story of Gold te Say that:
32 33
evolves into another o his ildhoOd birthday paties at
which Julius St tells a story, and then gs on tO tell
rt's sto. Over Eoty pages later, Van 33ess Offers
a send card, ''a figue writes at a table, anOther pees
er his shlder,'' and Chapter Four, ''ld,'' is evOked into
i (Ch 4, p l66, P) mis chapter descis the k-
forger Gold, as mll as a childhOOd ghost story and anOther
ghost sto which Gold has written
At the beginning O Chate Five, ''me President,'' the
dtor calls a tary halt to the test and Wr returns
to hi5 n office (both e one he uses as the president o
the orange juice plant and its epruction in the old ma's
house) , Weer misses his next ainnt with the dOctOr,
at wich Van Mess would have tlined his conclusiors abOut
Meer's TTental state, and the novel ends We st daw Ou
own conclusions, Meer js sufecing fran oven3Ork, gui3t,
loneliness, and a sense of los opportunities. He has di-
ficulty foing close relationships, especially with wn,
essed by his past, he provides himself with a future that
will isolate him r everythíng except his ries
mis vi of e vel's situation alls us to s jt
as the richly developed character study of a man whO shares
ch with Gene Wolfe
Weer is a man vey much like neHI don't rrean
that the s things have happened t me, but
that we have similar s Ouls(l)
ike his character, ne Molfe was an only child;
It's a wonderfu and teible thing--terible
cause one ends up being the last of the tribe,
the Only one who remembers the customs and
teachings of the nunken and of H ,
I am the only One left, the only thing let; if
I had to, I could not prove it was not all a
eam. (2)
er lives in isolation fr his land o H. Resrsible
fo another child's death, the yng Alden is isolated r
ch of his small taxn's society as wel. Later, when he iS
eight Or nine years old, his paents go to Euope, leavi
him behind with his aunt. he grows olde, the adults whO
pulated his yth die, their houses di5appear, the tO
changes, and eventually he becs the last of his tri
His nenDries, altered by ti, experience, and chaacter,
tak3 On the flux and unreality of dreaTns
Wole shaes sthi else with Meer--the pessureS
32

_
of a Jo n na9e nt. WOlte Was Senor ed to of Plant
Enaineerin0, where he ''edits, buys sOne twenty-five free-
ian artlcleS a year, a nd tes a jor cover story e ve
f months.''(3) The responsibility of this full-time
g ene nt siti On, COined with personal and artistic
fesponsibilities, must have weigh ed heavily at ti ne s, but
olfe can relieve s Of the pressure thrgh e practi
of his art. lfe d s nOt pe it such a release to M r
n o nages a plant at ma nufactures ersatz ora rq e jui .
solated, lOnely, and overworked, Meer imagines hin6elf
unstuck in ti, a bit lie Billy Pilgrim of Kut Vo nneg ut's
Slauhterh se Five. W r, in his forties, lieves th at he
is al so living as an Old n, sixty Or re, pa raly b a
stroke, and al One in a huge hOuse furnished wi r th at
ceate his TTe naries. The isolation in rooms of memoy
(where he frequently becomes lost) a nd the ma lady that
cripples his ility tO am unicate are imagined physical
situations that s lize M ee r's ntal condition,
Alden Dennis Meer wanders through the r o his
ne raries, either literally o figuratively, attempting to
lay the ghOsts OE his past by recal3ing it, just as e
stories he r mbe rs use gh os ts to c omb at the tellers' fears
of th grasping and shaping his ries, Meer hopes
to ean peace for himsel, to to te nns wi the death
of bby Black, with his love for his Aunt Olivia (olive
branches signi{y peace) and for magaret orn, and to
discover:
Mhat went wrOng? . Mhen I recall my
childh , and forget (as I tis do) eve-
i else, it is qu ite clea at my life was
to c . I was intelligent and industrious;
argaet and lOved one another deeply. I
w ld ma r ry her, and enjoy a car ee r that, if not
billiant, wou3d at least be locally distin-
ished. ... Mone of this hap pe n ed (Ch 4,
pp. 2l5-2l6, P)
I hie exploration of hi5 ries a ld sh h at m nt
WOn9, he might find peace. But e never leafn wy his
ff ailed; why he never Tnaried margaret, and Weer never
findS ace. yis memoi ends unre5olved, as lives, not
nOVels, do.
ThOugh unesolved, Wee's memoir is not a fo nnl ess
lleCti On of n3aterial but an artfully ralded constction
deSigned to clarify its narrato'5 aracte. me novel
lleCts ees st vita3 fies. 3n chapter Ff, the
0ld, sick weer inte ru pts the 5to of ld to say th at..
33

. · · least · him°
th s are 1f not more important, at 1 I.eJected _ l ‘ { l
ig; inirliiegäliate [than others, and so I must tell l weer also makes it obvious that the unreliability of
OU _ ·that I am very ill. (Ch. 4, p- l94· P) 1 his memoir is caused not only by the quirks of his psychol-
y ° I I 1 t' i hut by his conscious awareness that his memoir is an ar-
Thjs gives us a clue to Weer (and W¤_lf@ S) Se €C_1¤g tlstic (Of at l9äSC nonfactual) 'production. Though he may
mCeSS_ we are not presented w1th a detailed ehmholosleöl have felt little control over his life as he llved lt, he
history of Weer's life but with a collection of his l1fe's holds the art1st's control over it as he writes. Rather
- 1 tfdl events: his tussle Wlth hobblh than using hlS power to provide his life with a series of
;äi;heI;?,td;Orfi:t1a}lli;;O)$ith the other bOY°S death; the tléhehhe false happy endlngs, Weer instead uses his.story's fggm to
. - tif 1 atmt and his witnesslng o er gain control: the novel's form, a memoir with embedded
ti% he meets Margaret Lorn; a tour of stories, distances the narrator from his material, thus
__· · E te which he heads· and the Steflee he protecting him from being hurt by_1t. Weer recollects the
ägäriragäii g,l)‘;Celi?;_ qffbe doetegs testing doeä its Jobé events of his liäe främ guifze {a distance; the old man, ac-
hj_S emotienal being: his gllilt OVG}? ähOth€K child _S dejat-hr recent than flfteen yedrg ln hls past-__ The mlddlewaged
. - · h' his work, and his lH1öQl¤ä‘ Weer, in his m1d—fort1es, describes himself as a man of at
his failed love relations ips, 1 t Si ty to his doctor Th h h t _ t ,
i eas x . oug we may c oose o in er—
mon. In fact, a larger proportion of Weel-”'S memoir is Eaäeh pret the bo0k's actual situation as the recollections of a
t ' he has heard than by the events o _1s disturbed man of forty-five, the book's form 1S that of a
liläfäy äläs Sraiäibeiuggest that Weer may fail ln hle exterlof memoir by the older man- In using this form, Weer distances
Hteibecause he lives so much in hiS ihtefier ehe· F¤¤*h<?¤· himself in time from the events of. his life to distance him-
mre we arg wafned to question the ver-’aCitY ef the exherlor self from their emotional irrmediacy, though oeeaslohally,
' - - ; heir irmiediacy bursts through when he "must tell you . . .
events of his life, as he relates them t _
that I am very ill."
lt may be that the only reason childhood The novel's embedded stories themselves give its nar-
mories act on us so strongly is that being the rator added control over his life. The stories might be
mist remote we possess, they are the Wefet seen first as ways of avoiding particularly disturbing
memembered and so offer the least resistance to memories and second as ways of disguising memories by trans-
Ifhat rocess by which we mold them nearer and lating them into metaphors for the actual events. Third,
rer? to an ideal which is fundamentally artis- however, the stories are always framed, and the frames serve
ot- at least nonfactual- (Ch- lr PP· 20"2]·' te distance Weer fI‘ClI\ their Content-—he is not responsible
P) I for their invention. Only the brief meditations, such as
the one on the simulated stag, originate with Weer himself;
t wh'l Weer may not be able to release the rest are recollections of other people's memories. Same
FES, tgisääignthlgäugh äriistic expression, hie memelfe are are framed only twicez Weer reads the faiyy tele in a book
itigtie ·O,_- at least nonfactual," and that he ier to Some or haare the Chinese tale from his aunt. But some stoties
a t 1 ast like Gold the book forger, "an artist ShaP“ have gene through several narrators before we hear them; lh
Pxtenä a ä inétead ef the future" (Ch- 4, P· 23lr P)- response *10 a Thematic Apperception Test, the middle—aged
lng t Q pas k 't Obvigus then, that his m@InOlTieS are hot wagt relöileS what he believes to be the elderly weer's
bei/üeklehnaagsgellaele iuiitations of hiS life: that they chlldhooülnlenbry of a story his housekeeper heard from an
gie insgead products of his memory and imaginati0h Was he 1 Irish meld named Kate. If a story alters eachrtime it
nsible for Bobby B1aeks death, several years paeeee through another narrator, as in the children‘s
tätig tlljiliowtestling match') Dr. Black, the bOY°e fathem whäspered QOSSip game, then the stories Weer tells us travel
a ° ~ the un er h ‘ ‘ '
. De . Or was eavy dis uise. At the same time as the reveal
seems wltdhiiétfe;?_n;;la)fiä;sh(ipe)b;I2ä;;h i/:hLen?luSSrie and Bohbi/.5 weerls feelings gf isolation through their repeatelii images
cauääuää death the pfOdl_]Ct of the iinaginatj-On Of a Sensltlve ghostsl walls, locked KOOIIISI buried t[°@aSU['9’ and is-
eve 1 l oun boy looking for a 1feaSOn WhY his parents .andS{ the)! also protect Weer from the causes of those feel-
and One y y g Inge ln the exterior events of his life. They are not,
34
35
thiq5 are, if t rare irtant at leaSt
rare idiate than Other5, and 50 I 5t tell
y.. .Mat I am ve ill (Ch 4, p l94, P)
This gives us a clue tO Meer's (and WOle's) selecting
prss. are t presented with a detailed chrOnOlogical
history of r's life but with a collecti On of his lifes
rat tionally er{ul events his tussle with Bobby,
whi ends finally with the Other boy's death; the ti he
spends wi his beautiful aunt and his witnessing oE her
courtship; the irst tirre he neets Margaet LDrn; a tr of
the orange-jui factory wXlich he heads; and the stOries he
hears all his life. The docto's te5ting ds its job,
evokiq Me events of Weer's lie that reveal the e of
his eIational ing: his guilt over another child's dea,
his failed lOVe relati OnShlS, hiS WOrk, and hl5 ima9ina-
tion
In fact, a larger prrtion of Weer's rrerai is taken
up by the stories he has hea than by the events of his
life. mis atio suggest that Meer y fail in his exteio
life because he lives so nuch in his interior one. Further-
rare, we an warned to 0estion the veracity o the exterior
events of his life, as he relates them:
It may be that the only reason childhood
raries act on us so strongly is that being the
most remote we po5sess, they are the worst
rembered and so offer the least resistan to
that process by which we nald them nearer and
nearer tO an ideal which is fundntally artis-
tC O at least nOnfaCtUal (Ch l, 20"2l,
)
mus, we learn t whie er y not be able to elease
his pessures thrgh aistic eression, his rreTairs are
aistic, ''or at least nonfactual,'' and that he is, to
eXtent at leaSt, like 6old the k f O9er, ''an ati5t 5ha'
ing the pa5t inStead Of the fUtUe'' (Ch. 4l . 23l, P).
Wee kes it obvious, then, that hi5 nBTTDries are t
tO taken as reli''le imitations of his life, that ey
ae instead products of his ra and igination Mas he
truly responsible fo Bobby Black 's death, several yearS
ate their wrestling match? Dr. Black, the boy's ather,
sms without rancor en he examines yng n. Or was e
cause and efect relationship betn the tussle and bbY'S
eventual death the product o{ the igination of a sensitiVe
and lonely y Oung boy lking for a eason why his parent5
34

_ t
'ected him?
r also kes it vious that the uneliility of
hs i is caus nOt Only by the irks Of his ychol-
t y his cOnSCl5 awareness that his ir is an ar-
tistic (or at lea5t nonfactual) pucti On mgh he y
have felt little c OntOl Ove his lie as he lived it, he
olds the atist'S COntOl Over it aS he wites Rather
an u5ing his er tO pOvide his life wi a seies o
false happy endings, me itead uses his sto's fo to
ain contOl: the nOvel's fOm, a memOir with ded
soFies, di5tanCeS the naat Or fran hiS material, thUS
protectiq him fr ing huft by it Wr ecollects the
events of his liEe fr qute a distann; the Old man, ac-
di to the chOnOlical view, embes events no re
fent than fifteen yeas in his past. The middle-aged
e, in his d-Oties, scribes hielf as a rcan o at
least sixty tO his dOctor. mgh y che to inter-
pet the k's actual situatim as the ellection5 of a
disturbed n Of fOrty-five, the k's fo is that of a
i by the Olde nan, In usi this fo, er distans
hin6elf in tinR fan the events of his li Ee to di5tance him-
self from thei emOti Onal innediacy, though occasimally,
their innediacy buts thOugh en he ''nust tell you .
that I ve ill.''
me vel's d stories theelves give its r-
ratOr added cOntOl Ove his life. The stoies might be
seen first as ways of avoiding paticulaly distubing
ries and secOnd as ways O disguising rrerTDries by taM-
lating them intO netaphos fOr the actual eventst Third,
hver, the stOies ae always faned, and the fanRs seve
tO distance Meer fran thei content--he is not cespmsible
f Or eir invntion. Only the brief meditations, such as
e 0ne on the simulated stag, originate with e hinGelf;
the rest are recollections oE other le's ries.
afe fr Only twice r eads the fai tale in a k
Or hearS the Chinese tale fr his aunt. t s stoies
ne thalgh several narfators before we hear th: in
SnSe to a mematic Apperceptim Test, the middle-aged
Weer elates hat he lieves to be the elderly I3eerls
Childh nera of a sto his housekeeper heard f an
If35h maid named Kate. Tf a stor alies each time it
PaSSeS thOugh another narcator, as in the childrenls
iSred gossip g, then the stories wee tells us tfavel
Uder hea disguise. At the 5a ti as they reveal
er'S feelings of isolation thrgh thei repeated ige5
O ghOsts, alls, locked ooms, ied tfeasue, and s
landS, they al5o pi0tect fr the uses of te fee_
lS in te exterior events of his life. They , not,
35

Own minds, we can unuerstand tne world only as it is
_ — * tgd b our minds and mamories.
after eu' weet'S Stones at all, but Kate'5 teeteiuäsailtxthe mama Wolfe is very interested in memory, how it alters and
or Gold's. In tellling those talest Wcäethgegam time he has _ how it preserves. He explores its nature in almost all his
has escaped frem hle bufdehsome Pas e i major work (the only exceptions are short stories). Wolfe
eSC¤Ped into 1** _ 4; can-ies out his exploration in a man-mer that suggests a
But this dv;SC¤S51oh t>ä€¤;¤§U;¤;;l"t;§rE@ä§1§];@j<§\;„*th;j mlange of Dickens, Proust, and Borges and uses heightened
if Alden Dennis oo! were ’ · t rization meditation and embedded stories These
· tside the Charac e ' ' '
Gene Rodmöh Wolfe aCt“al1Y wrote lt' If wa Step ou techni ues when used in a life sto such as Weer
b t th three Q , _ _ _
“ettetOt‘S.freme' we See thatd i;hellitU?Saaoäictioä writes, preserve memories by altering them into something
telatuhnshlä bettteiirictieäith äxriery lttime vsieer warns us about memorable rather T-hen mundane. when used by wolger they
about *1 e ha um O , ' . t th show us how we all preserve our memories by altering them so
the Unreliablltty ot me me“·OÜee' Wolfe tells US .abOu e that everything we remember is transformed by the memory
connection between reality and fiction. Weer sal/S- into fictiom
~ Weer remembers his aunt and her suitors not as ordi-
be . .
It may be that Some ot these evehntsldlhgäicrgnd mary folks but as a strange, beautiful, and aloof heroine
never Oeeüffäddat ötlit buthäägg ;’n§UElavOrSL_fOr with her worshipful swains, each of whom has something to
that Others e ho e e cqmend him, only one an adequate hero. Den sees Olivia's
~ · ‘ —— t . . .
oxamplel et Jeete“eY.°t emlläulty (EE Slgäthääa courtship in the same terms as those of the fairy tale he
l havä laterüuncéonsciously c osen Q reads. Of Dr. Peacock the archeologist it might be said, as
(Ch· , P- r the princess says of her first suitor, "his kisses had
. t t l f f h—t h" Ch. 2 . 23
whether events occurred as Weer describes ithéälgkxhoiähää iäeteäikgothi fp<;l’ä<_;cäS;' Sgäänd i;ET;q;§a3tam€S( Macaéeg is Ä
their emeiliohöl Colors were es weätr;eä?’aSe;3;nt can hot he merchant. Stewart Blaine, with his servants and his finan-
the reader- Ihdoodv the exeet na U le a fee precisely Oh cial wizardry, parallels the princess' third suitor, who ar-
kn0W¤ hä/_ ehY{>horl lo}? een any two Peep g rives with a bodyguard of aerial spirits, whose "kingdom was
itS em loha va U · . · t t his too insubstantial for me" (Ch. 2, p. 64, P).
The Dfeeisioh of Weefe record 15 not the pom O f Olivia's fourth suitor, Julius Smart, comes armed with
Y“e‘“oir' net te the i“‘PKeSS1‘O“ fette preäqéäivgenielität 25 a strange tale whose characters are Dickensian in their
"realiSm," the Pomt bei viel? S ,SlCcr:§;ctet. the past be_ amalgamation of compassion with Qrotesqüery. To charac-
true not to evente, U o ee? T - _ terize people in these terms, altering them into heightened
Care a Rorschach or a Thematic APPorCePtlO“ Teet' Slg Q; · t t th h 1 f h·ld wh ·t
„„i.„„ .„d reafl my in ie me«¤¤<>¤ ¤f chagacegé ¤¥ä°E;t;S.f2“§„„Z „hiO§§,¥°h‘§.°i’„§„p§„§„t.d Jjäéi 'ä°§’S?E
wolfe's novel does hot attempt teepetete es e S 1;:-€C_ true of the adult who romanticizes his aunt and his past;
life, Öuplieetihg o‘{€“tS es they tmght egpeefh ;O ignomänon and it is true to the act of memory. Memory shapes the past
tive observer· Beh)/1hQ the Posslbllltg O eiéemi rät seem to into stories as a mnemonic device. Julius Smart, Olivia's
öS ebjectivity, Wolfe ereääis at *;:0;; tistgat Vgsion one successful suitor, has the power to remember his history
one person and strives to e 1 _ _j „ 2 es a story. That power wins him Olivia's hand, and along
Wolfe's story,. rather than weetdeé lisa ggäitlsclfäggs Wlhh his being "the first major change to take place within
6 5*1OfY about Stoffel; _ Gild tstäii Ocäveéy time One OE my memory," it makes him "the central character of this
memorieS, ehd Welfe a rica es S et ' . heek" (Ch. 3, pp. 122 and 159, P). Tne power to transform
the nove)_s characters tells a story, we are remindetd 0; the events Of everyday life into fiction is wOlfe,S power;
hoveys fictive nature. Whe§eVeY ihcgigefiäig äafep about fäetion admits the transformation, whereas memory doesn't
story before the end, ae Weer 065 W1 I nt a ways-
the princess, we are $1m¤ltQa"‘eOUelY temmeee tääétäääglhoe _ In addition to heightened characterization, Peace con-
is full of uncomplel-ee Stones ;¤dlg“?t witaggictioh is hot ääins several very beautifully written meditations, each
to real life but to a story.} o e snmr t E- riggered by a single event or object of intense nostalgic
sterile, having to do only WU-h lte ettltlee'. it ii a äeäls St‘:€‘hQth- The most beautiful, most extended, and wittiest
conscious artifact which, thr¤¤Qh its art_ltlel;ll.{hineOUr
us something of the truth about reality. TraPPe W1 t 37
36 E
_ _
' l t
Or Gold'5 In telling those tales, ee can feel as if he
has escaped fran hi burdens past at the s tine he has
escaped into it.
t this discussion O the fO of Peace treats it as
if Nden nnis r e the true author, en k that
re Rn lfe actually ote it, If step tside e
l
relati Onship between truth and fiction it is a fiction
at the nature of fiction, Eve ti Meer wans us aut
e Unreliablity Of hiS rieS, MOlfe tell5 US aboUt the
c Onnection betn reality and fiction eer says;
Tt y be that saTe of ese events 3 describe
never curred at all, but only shaJld have, and
that othes had not the shades and flavofs4fo
ele, of jeaousy or anti0ity O shane--that
have late unconsciousy chen to give th
(Ch , 2l, P)
Whether events occued a5 eer descibes them, ether
their enDtional coars were a Meer says , cannot knam by
the reader, Indeed, the exact natu of an event can not be
kn by anyone, no can any two people agree precisely on
its enDtional value.
me precísion of r'5 record is not the point o his
memOir, nor is the impression O a precise record, of
''realism, the point of Mofe's fiction Weer's nDir is
true nOt tO eVent5, bUt tO Meer'S ChafaCtei the paSt -
s a Rorschach, or a Thematic Apeception Test, sig-
niEicant and real only in its reveatim of character,
le's novel does not attempt to operate as a slice of
life, duplicating events as they might appear to an objec-
tive ob5enre nyirq the sibility o such a pheaenon
as objectivity, lfe creates a world as it might seem tO
one peson and stives to maXe it true to that vision,
Wol Ee's sto, rather than Meer's, is a taiction
a story about stoies Gold forges books, Wee shapes
rrenDies, and lfe Eabricates stories, Eve ti one o
the novel's aactes tells a story, we are eminded of e
nove's fictive nature, Meneve a character stops hi
StOry befOe the end a5 e S With e fa tale aboUt
the prnCeS We are SiltaneoUSly reminded that eal llte
is Eull of uneted stoies and that we are listenirq nat
to real life but to a story, Mofe's metafiction is nOt
sterile, having to do only with its atifi, 3t is a self"
COnSCiOUS atifaCt WiChl thr9h itS aiCality, tellS
us thiq o the tth at reality, Trapd within ou
36

ml-nas, we Can UnaefSCana tne Orl0 only a8 lt S
iated bY Yf ms a ries
t4lfe i8 interested in ry, hm it altes a
h it preseeS. He el0re6 its nature in at all his
jor rk (e mlY eXPtiOns ae shO stOries). lfe
Aries alt hS exQlOratim in a mannef that suggeSts a
lae Of DickeM, st, a rges and uses heightened
cacteiati, itim, and eed stories me
tfee techni4UeS , when USed in a life stOry such as
i'tes, preSe rieS by alteiq th intO sanethiq
moable rathe than mundane en used by lfe, they
sh us h all peserve ies by alteriq em
t erythi er is transformed by the memoy
into ficti On
r rn his aunt and her suitors t as ordi-
y Eolke but as a strae, autiful, and aloof hefoi
with he wOrshipEul swains, each of Wh has iq to
c him' , Only O an adequate hero. n ss Olivia's
artship in e s tenns as the of e fai tale he
eads . aak the archeolist it 'ght be said, as
the pincess says of her first suitor, ''his kisses had
tasted t strOngly Of Eresh-turned eah'' (Ch. 2, p. 23,
P). ike the princess' sec0nd suito, anes Macaf is a
nerchant. 5tmart Blaine, with his servants and his {inan-
cial wi2ardry, parallels the pinss' id suitor, who a-
rives with a yard Of aerial spirits, wh ''kingdan was
t insubstantial fo TTe'' (Ch 2, p. 64, P).
Olivia's {th suitor, ulius Srt, s a with
a strange tale whose chaacters ae Dickensian in their
amalgamation of cOmpassion with gotee. To charac-
terize le in these tenns, altering th into heightened
tYpee, i true to the psychology of a child who witnesses
e acts oE adults though his inexperienced eyes; it is
tue Of the adult who nticizes his aunt and his past;
a it is te to the act of nenDry. e shapes the past
int0 stOies as a mrgic device Juliu5 S, Olivia'g
Successul suito, has the e to e his histo
aS a etOry. mat wins him Olivia's hand, and almg
Wi his ing ''the first ma7o ae to take place within
memOry,'' it makes him ''the cental character of this
'' (Ch. 3 , pp. l22 a l59, P). me r to transfo
the even4 of eveday life into iction is lfe's pmer,
iCtion ' ts the transfonnation, whereas memory doe5n ' t
always.
In addition to heightened characteization, Peace n-
tainS several vey beautifully witten neditat_ims, each
tiggered by a single event or object of intense talgic
Ste. me st autiful, rast extended, a wittiest
37

is the OHG begins as wear! the Old man! I Stories ]['€fl€Ct their tellgrg
searches for his old simulated staghorn Boy Scout knife. : ' sY are 8 good way for weer
First weer/Wolfe imagines "a simulated stag, his horns held tn clzpäéräéeägd K§;€‘§?€h_' th? COmplex characters er the
proudl as those of any elm—deer" who ranges a forest with ’ nenn. ' Orlss O t@h Show unexpected -
"trees? whose leaves are dying with the summer in every Sltlest fogleghe gmtesque Oh ttltlhtéhing in othemisgrgääha
color, like bruises" (Ch. l, p. 16, P). The word "bruises" Or Con fo -peOpl€’ Such as Annt Arabella with hör ghostly
triggers the next fantasy, of "races unborn, withheld frau neääääpäägu-tl;ä§’G;äälU$ Smaht wlth his Qhostly Southern
us," whose "wonderful richness of stereotypes" he imaginesr äad Finäliiy the l Sith h1s ghostly
finally returning, by way og likening the bravery gf the to escapé intopfintggä ioititoritels reflecta weerS ten-
russet brown race to that o the simulated stag to e Boy . , _ er an attempt to regolve
scout knife (ch. 1, p. 16, 1>>. I the “‘YSt@“€S. Of hls llfsr he escapes his reporter'5 Hemd,
As in Proust's Remembrance of Things Past, each memory ny Conääntéiatlng hpoh hls $t<>ryteller's.
oggkee ti Vater: and detailed icenle, buénf äsh ih _B$*—’9fss° densely layered,€ Bits;/125-11lsigriägnlienhrates so On these
yrin s, e memories move ar er an art er in 0 an- s ow us not only the
tasy, though without losing sight of the original source. älilnacssän O;SWeer but also the character of fiction. Fic-
Q; turning nundane objects into the stuff of fantasy, weer Obligationgto Hlnäränoorlei) lhtO_ st<?‘rl€‘S, hut it retaina lte
charges those objects with unforgettability, and Wolfe, des am alterää/'b Ytsalung tths thlhQS about it: that
through these associational meditations, shows the extent to alwa S C late d Y G nßmotlsllzsrsz that they are not
which the mind veers from the memory of a reporter, through confxgontomäo diégänse tgnag thsY lcsh s@YV@ bOth to escape and
association to the memory of a storyteller. ' n hsVss ·
Storytellers form an inportant part of Alden Dennis also wpatever memory does te alter lives in retrggpectl lt
weer's life. He doesn't tell others any original stories- Wear pfeesejrves them and glvss them ä kind Of immortality.
though he fabricates meditations which are almost stories nnfuifilääängagt nessääte thtnlte @V@h more than he dogs his
and his responses to Dr. Van Ness become the story Peace-- . ' etvss 15 PöSt in memor ‘
but he absorbs many, many stories. 'I‘he novel contains at ;§?£l;i§;Er9° t.§h‘°“9h_ nis msmsl-’Y« h@ and thosilhäertgnénbägg
least thirteen embedded stories, ranging in their complete- will exist Un ll he dlssi thFOl{Qh his memoir, hle, memofies
ness from several quoted passages in an invented book (The through hisaio Ong äs there 15 anyone to read the bwk;
Lusty Layer) to the long oral story told by Julius Smart momories w.ll benss O msmshlfssr the physicality of hie
that takes up thirty—nine of the 264 pages in the first edi— 1 Phss‘stVsÖ Uhtll the structure er-umbleS_
tion of Peace. The stories vary in other ways as well, When I d _
their totality representing a cross—secti0n Of St0rYt@lli¤9 tried t Gslgned the 9ntranC€waY ef this hO¤S@: I
forms and conventions. Weer reads several stories and has actualiä mfcreats the f¤Y@r of Blaine's——nOt its
several others read or told to him; he makes them up and tualit Y lh a taP@—m@¤S¤gre SSHSG, but its ac-
dreams them. There are Irish, Chinese, Arabian, and memory ashl h€“‘s‘hhst€d_1ti why should net my
Yemenite folk tales, ghost stories, and mysterieS MOSt are and by' w ich Stlll .€xlStn' ‘*hl¢h stlll "lil/@5
fantasies; some are told as true stories with fantastic less äeaänes ahd has 1tS bélng," be lege actual,
elements; scxne are non—fantastic fictions. Many have no Sh- and ifa ’ than a pnyslcal €htltY hO‘^' dérvolished
dings, foiling expectations. In the fairy tale, though the reCOV9rabl€? (Ch· 2: P- 83, P)
requisite three princes display their courage to the Reoo d- _ _
princess, she refuses all three and the story is interruptéd bullijilnlg ägtualltles es he rsmsmbers them in his memoir,
before she marries. One of the Irish tales is interrupted beyond häs dgmthln woodyshtl marble, Weer extends his life
in the middle of a fight between a Christian rat and a lmnortality aTh€and häähgi häm$@lf a few years Clgggr to
heathen cat-·we never discover who wins. life · - '. eng O_ t s @Xt@hSiOn Weer gaing On his
Weer hirrself doesn't finish his story; how did the huildéshäg Ptähgttlßh t0 the skill with which he
egg get in the barn, why didn't he marry Margaret Lorn, does same oroportion b il; hls hohssg ThlS is, of courge, the
Dr. Van Ness ever present his diagnosis to weer? Weer'S Wolfe, oporate Y lc ahY ssF1<>¤S artist, such as Ggng
Stories reflect, then, his own experience Of life as am' The Cons?. · « .
biguous and full of unresolved mysteries. Further, since lates the buildiustgsgmot ths Däfät 1S a lonely jdb; lt iso-
present and future. Still it is a

_ _
stories reflect their tellers, they are a good way fo eer
to Catufe and emember, the c Omplex Chaactes of the
le he ets . me st Ories often sh unexcted pron-
si' tie5 fO the grOteSe Or frightening in othei bland
or ntrOll le, Such as Aun Arabella with her ghostly
newsper aiCleI Ulus Srt with his ghostly SoUthern
thic stO and ld with his gh0tly k mat Binds the
ad FinallY, the lethOfa Of stOries reflects M's ten-
n tO esca intO fantasy rather than attppt to esolve
the ysteies Of hi5 life he escapes his epoter's
nntrating upOn his storyteller's.
MOlfe, the StOYteller cOncentates so on these
e3y layer, rgesian stOries to sh us not only the
character Of Meer but alsO the character of fiction. Fic-
tion changeS memOrles intO stOries, but i retains its
obligati On tO , by saYing te things about it: that
ries ae altered by e rializers, that they are t
always clete, and that they can serve th to escape and
afont, tO disise and reveal.
ateve ds to alte lives in retrosct, it
alsO peseves them and gives them a kind of itality
Meer, feaing a desOlate future even re than he ds his
unfulfill st, preserves his past in Eary, rair, and
architecture. Ough his , he ard the he reTnbes
will exist until he dies; through his ir, his ries
will exist as lOng as there is anyone to read the book;
thrOugh his hOuse Of memorie5, the physicality of his
ries will be peserved until the stcture ces.
Men I designed the entanceway of this house, I
tried tO eceate the foyer of Blaine's--not its
actuality in a tapeasure sense, t its ac-
tuality as T red it; why should not my
memOry Which still eXiStS, which 5till ''lives
a breathes and has it5 being," be less actual,
le5s real, than a physical entity nax lish
a iecoverable? (Ch 2, p. 83, P)
Rerdi actualities as he rembes them in hi5 mem0i
bUiJding them in woOd and marbe, Meer extends his lf
Ya his death and brings hielf a few years closer t
ltality. me len th of the extension ee ains on hi
le is in dicect poportion to the skil3 with which h
ilds his neir and his house. mis i
pri On by wtlich any seious artist ', such as 'Gene
l{e, Opeates.
me nstction of the 5t i5 a lonely job.. it iso-
ates the builde pesent and future. stil, t i
9

chosen isolation. Wolfe's recurring concern with the causes we cannot count cn any Sense f y
and effects of isolation and rejection extends to their un- y either, though that Sense ie a O elosurerlh this novel,
chosen circumstances. Alden Dennis Weer——whose parents i weer/Wolfe never teils Ue how great Cemfort in many neve1e_
leave him with an aunt while they COUK EUfOPer who loves her suitors or the story Of gt S Story Of the princess ahd
that aunt while she treats him off—handedly, and who holds eeyet how the hainted eeg gee _rahdOh ends. We never diS_
himself responsible for the death ot another child——feels Atabellye ghost was real. M sgh _tne haVh_Of whether Annt
rejected by parents, relatives, and his town- The Uheheeen , Only because they remain nnecä/yeäries remain Uneelved not
circumstances of his childhood gradually turn him into a man A their lack of Cieeui-e leaves ne ln real llfe· hut because
who Chooses to reject any close relationship, to isolate Oriented, ieeleted from tepeenee¤¤certain, heeitentl die_
himself from parenthood, from love, and from ahy hl-lt the world of the novel, just ag the lsmhe actvalltv even ih the
most minimal dealings with his town. In peeoe, techniquee et enge _ Os Chfonology doee_
_ Although particulars of Weer's life are the causes of chronoloogegfotder eeeve themes Ofhlye ed etßrieg end nOn_
his particular kind of isolation, Wolfe believes that isola— They algg eetve the ncyel,e eeie leelatleh and rejection_
tion is a universal and inevitable, as well as a particular, about the nature of tinte. Sumriehce-flctlenel Speclllation
condition. Its inevitability and universality are caused by novel's more ehetrect eeneeene tnyglY Ceherete among the
the infinite variability of human perceptions. Weer's speculations seem out et piece ehe Ses? n’·”leElY mehtiened
memories of events do not match the memories of anyone else; indieatign that the nerteeer ie dlghlfleant on-ly ag an
his vision of the world matches no one else‘s, Each human tiohal, "Scientific" expienation tet ieperete .te flha a Fe-
being is isolated from all others because of the uniqueness worth noting only begause they reee lsnleerlehlletleh, and
of each one's perception. In Peace a shared vision is Nlghte" and The Book of the New Sun gen Seveh American
impossible; the closest anyone can come to that kind of con- SPeC¤lationS °- C Ualll/' neweverr the
tact is through the sharing of stories. However, since lmpoftance.
Stewart Blaine and Weer argue over the nature of the locked Matter and ener
room in Julius Smart's story, even the facts of stories al- [it is the boy etglgoäänmxit ebeei9StLTOven' DOCU)?
ter as they are received by various mindS The memoir that V tefiStic eruditienh Only gfensfwlth UnCnarae'
Weer writes, and the house he builds, preserve only another. Thus whatever exiss Ormed into one
"actuality as I remembered it," an actuality estranged from _ formed but not destroyed· but 5.eah be trans-
any other person's notion. { limited to bits gf metel endexlstence is hOt
Such multiplicity of perception isolates stories, L Vietas and persenaiitiee end e Keys ot night'-
storytellers, and listeners, reminding us that Weer's public § exlet- I am an eioetly menven mememea all
manifestations of his memory in memoir and architecture can I there is no one te edviee nov' Doctem ahd
transfer only a clouded vision. Thus, the relative immO1?— Ü ml/Self back because I need eva' I have Cast
tality that those manifestations might earn for Weer's g elifoke. (Ch, 3, p_ 174 P) Y v' I have had a
memory is not of the real thing. The real thing, the past Rea ’
as Weer holds it in his mind, will die with him. Wolfe con- 1. Sen tslls US that no bey ot tout eeeld h
veys unreliability ot "actuality in a tape—·measuring sensa" I eéni? that they actually etiee ttom th eva epoken these
by transmitting Weer's story through his clouded vision- ; ti 6 eldee meh- The very Outlandiehnäs Lmrgllable memOVY
Just as Weer's narration is unreliable, then, so are the h On' eepeelally in the nxjuth ct e S Q the SP€C¤la·
novel's chronology and closures. ow, nhrellable that memory ie vywng ehlldr emphasizes
Because of the novel's non-chronological order, we i ällahlllty and varieueneee ct et' thehgh the un-
must cautiously and hesitantly piece together the order of j nee lmmertality that memory Set;/1e;€(;“tt§,eehY hllmehity
its events, and we cannot know the precise nature of its g uwhet le Peeeage restotee hope_ Memories d erst tO ellow
narration: whether it is told by the old man disabled by a Tree ever exlsts can be ttanstermed bUtO' lhdeedr eXlSt.
stroke, by the middle—aged man suffering a mental breakdowh, ° to me the law Of Physics appliee to matt not destrovedß
or even as is suggested in Chapter Two, by the young boy deSty_emOhv' bmi the idea that ttenstemeiä and energy, hOt
lying usprawled heeioe my Candle anti tiny SmOking dieh,' meteehetleh leads us to reelize thet the 1 On des hot meeh
overcome by the fumes of his chemistry set (Ch. 2, p. 7l, memeef/;;CS' mekee metaphorieal Sense ahgrgggniieiläd te
p)_ , no matter how isolated, isolatingl eltetedr: E;
40 41
_
chosen isolaton. lfe's recuci ng cO ncen wth the causes
and efects o isolation and cejecton extends tO thel un
chosen ciccumstances. Alden Denni 4eer--Whe entS
leave him with an aunt whil they tour EucOpe, whO lOves
that aunt wh ile she treats hiln ff-handedly, an O tlOlds
hilf es nsible or the death Ot anOthec child-"eels
rejected by rents, relatives, and his t n m e unchOsen
circ tance. of his childh oa3 gadually tucn him ntO a n
who ch es t eject any close celationship, tO iSOlate
himself ran paenthuo, fan love, an an any but the
TTDs t minimal dealings with his tOwn
Although pa ticulas o Weer's life are the causes O
hjs paticula kind ot islation, h7ole be lieves th at sOlaN
tion is a universal and inevitable, well as a cticula,
condition. Tts inevitability anc3 unive5ality are caused by
the infinite vaciability of human peception5 Weer's
ies of events do not tch the rre rTa ies ot anyOne clse
his vision of the wocld ma tches nO One else's, ,ach h n
i is isolated c a3l theFs cau5e ot the uniquness
of each one's pecception In Peace a sha visi On is
' 5ible; the clest anyOne can ta that kind Of cOn-
tact is though the sharing Of stOries. H aM ve since
Stewart Blaine and W argue ove the natue of the 30ck
r in Julius S rt'5 stoy, even the facts Ot stOries al-
ter as they are' eceived by vaiOusninds. The ne rair that
Meer wites, and the house he builds, preserve Only
''actuality a.s T e Tnbe ed it,'' an actuaLity estranged f
any Othe pe son's notion
Such multilicity o peceptiOn isolates stOies,
to ry telles, a nd istenes, eminding us that Wee's public
ni Eestations o his ITe ra y in ra ir and achitecture can
transfe only a clded vision. mus, the elative i r-
taity that those maniestatins might ean for Wee's
is not of the eal thing, me eal thing, the st
as Mee holds it in his mind, will die with him lfe n
veys uneliability ot ''actuality in a ta asuring sense''
by tansmitting Weer's stOry though his clOued visi On
Ju5 as Mee's narratian is unceliable, then, so ace the
novel's chronol ogy and closues,
Because o the novel's non-chronological order, m
st cautiously and hesitantly piece t 0g ether the orde Of
its events, and we cannOt know the pcecise nature o it5
na Fration: whethe it is told by the Old ma n disabed by a
stFoke, by the 'ddle-ag ed n suffering a rTe ntal beakd ,
or even as is suggested in Chapte JWO, by the young Y
lying ''spawled beside my candle and tinY smOking dish,'
ove aTe by the f s of his chemist set (Ch 2, p 7l,
).
4O

__ t ry
m cannOt cou nC any se e Ot Cl0SUe ln lS Ovel,
the,, thgh that senSe is a eat ca1lfot in ny novels.
ofe neve tells us h e StO ry of e pcincess and
5utos r the stO Of St Brandon ends We mve diS-
r h e inted g t in e ba rn Or e er Aunt
Aala5 gho5t WaS eal mYStecies remain unSOlv n Ot
y cause they r in unsOlved in ceal life, bu t cause
r lack of clusue eaveS uS uncertain, hesitant, dis-
fented, i Solat f ta aSUre aCtUallty eVen ln e
ld of the novel, JU5t aS the lack Of chonOl ds
Tn eace, teniques Of uninshed stores and non-
chronolical Ode See the5 Of isOlati On and ejecti On
They also serve the nOVel's Science-fici Ona1 sPeCulati On
aut the natue Of tl. Sursingly conccete ng Me
novel'S re abStaCt COnCefnS, the5e blefly nenti Oned
s lations seem Out Of pla and 5igniicant Only as an
indicatin that the naratOC lS deSeate tO flnd a ca-
tional, ''scientiic'' explanati On fO hi5 disOrientati On, and
th noting only hecaUSe they recu in ''Seven Ameican
Mights'' and m e k Of tha ew Sun. Actually, h axe ver, the
sculations have erful thematic i tance.
matter and ener cann Ot be destoyed, & tO
Eit is the bo y ot f c o s pe aks with unchaac-
teistic eruditi On. Only tanso nTR d into one
anothe. Thus whateve exists can tans-
fo d bu t not destcoyed; but existence i5 not
limited to bit5 of metal and ays o light--
vistas and rsonalities and even memories all
exist. I am an eldely man now, tor, and
there is no One tO dvise me. I have cast
ITy self ba ck be cause I need you. T have had a
stoke. (Ch. 3, p l74, P)
ReaSon tells us that no y of fou uld have 5 po ken the5e
line5, that they actually arise f the unreliable
O the Older n. me ve tlandishs5 of e scula-
tl On, eS Pe cially in the ra uth of a young child, e mp ha5i2e5
hOW Unreliable that memory is. Yet, though the un-
eliability and vaiousness of s m to deny h nit
the S i tality that ITaD ry seemed at first to allow
U,,S, thiS passage restoes ho . nD ries do, indeed, exist.
WhateVe exists can be tran5eormed but not de5troyed.
e, the lav of physics applieS to tter and energy, not
tO memoy, but the ide, that tansfo ti
deStction leads us to ceali
tahysics, makes metahorca3 sense. presevaton ot
mOcies, no mattef h isoated, soati
4l

various these merrories might be, is possible, even though VI
the memories saved are transformed from tape-measure ac-
tuality to remembered actuality. The transformation is THE DEVIL IN A FOREST
nothing to cause despair. It ·is,g after all, the artist S ' “'— "——i
act to make the world more meaningtul or poignant by trans-
foming it in a significant way. Weer has done that for I I l
hinßelf by writing his memoir. Wolfe has done it for us by The cover of the paperback edition of The Devil 1n a
writing PeaC€_ 5%;-% (1977) does a·cur1ous thing. It misleads its poten-
”—” tial readers into thinking that Gene Wolfe, the science-
NOTES fiction writer, has written a fantasy. "A beautifully told
__ „ fantasy," says the blurb. The back cover refers to "the
(1) Joan Gordon, “A“ Interview with Gene wßlfev endless struggle between Good and Evil," fantasy‘s central
Fiction Review, Surmxer 1981, p. 19. Conflict, and lists the Barrow man, "the awesome spirit of a
(2) ew, p. 18.  k E lO¤g—dead but st1ll—worshipped warrior," as ·a main charac-
(3) Michael Difdör °°G€¤€ Wolfe Talks About The Boo O ter. Actually, the Barrow Man appears only in a dream, the
the New Sun,°“ 30 Jam demarcation between good and evil is not tidily drawn, and
1983, p. ll. nothing fantastic occurs in The Devil in a Forest. The
novel is, instead, an adolescent novel, a historical novel,
and a mystery that points out of the past into the future,
toward The Book of the New Sun.
The Devil in a Forest (originally published in 1976)
was inspired by the Christmas carol "Good King Wenceslas,"
as the brief passage "About the Author" at the end of the
book tells us.
I found myself wondering who indeed was that
nameless peasant from whom most of us are, in
one way or another, descended. ("About the
Author," p. 223, DF)
"That nameless peasant" appears in the two verses from the
carol quoted at the beginning of the novel.
"Hither, page, and stand by me,
If thou know'st it telling;
Yonder peasant, who is he?
Where and what his dwelling?"
"Sire, he lives a good league hence,
Underneath the mountain,
( Close against the forest fence,
[ By Saint Agnes's fountain."
i (p- 7, DF)
I
I Th€‘_QOOd king does not appear except as "the man in the arm
chair" in Chapter Twenty-two where, characteristically, he
asks lots of questions (p. 212, DF). The peasant of the
5OnQ becomes Mark, the adolescent protagonist of the novel,
42 43
_
varjs these ries Tnight be, is possble, even tnough
the memories saved ae tcansfOed f tapeasure acN
tuality to emembered actualty The transEOmation is
nOthing to cause despai, It is, after all, the atist's
act to ke the world TTDe TTBaningul o pOignant by tcans
foing it in a significant way has done that fo
huT6' elf by wTitirq his ir. WOlfe has dOne it fO us by
itiq _a
ES
(l) 0an GOdon, '' Interview with Gene Molfe,'' Science
Fiction Review, S l98l, p, l9.
(2) _Gordon inteview, p l8,
(3) ichael Dirda, ''ne MOlfe Talks About 'The Book of
the Mew Sun, ''' Mashin0t On POst k World, 30 Jan.
l983, p. ll,
42

_t _tt___ _
THE DEML IN A
me cover Of te paperback edition of The vil in a
Forest (l977) ds a curis thing Tt misleads its pOten-
tial readeS intO thnking that Gene Wole, the SCienCe-
fiction writer, has written a fantasy, ''A beautiullY tOld
fantasy,'' says the blub, The back cover retes tO ''the
endless 5tnlggle between and Evil,'' antasy'5 cental
nflict, and lists the r man, ''the awesane spiit Of a
longead but stillOrshipped wai Or,'' as a main charac-
ter. Actually, e Baax man apas Only in a dream, e
drcation tween good and evil is not tidily drawn, and
nothing fantastic occurs in The vil in a FOest. me
novel is, instead, an adolesnt nOvel, a histoical nOvel,
a a y5te that pOint5 Out Of the paSt intO the UtUre,
ta me k Of the w Sun,
me vil in a Forest (oiginally published in l976)
was inspired by the Chiss carOl '' King Menceslas,'
as the brief passage ''AbOut the Author'' at the end O the
book tells us,
T ound myself wondering who indeed was that
nless peasant fran whan most of us are, in
one way or another, descended. ( ''About the
Author,'' p 223, DF)
mat naneles asant'' appears in e two verses fan the
caol 0oted at the beginning o the novel,
Hithe, page, and stand by TTe,
Tf thou knm'st it telling;
Onder peaSant, O 5 he
ee and what his dwelling?'
Sie, he lives a g league hence,
Underneath the untain,
Cle against the forest fence,
Saint Agne5's fntain.'
(p. 7, )
me g king ds not apar except as "the n in the a
air'' in Chapter TWenty-two efe, characteristically, he
aSkS lOt5 of que5tions (p, 2l2, D). me asant of the
n9 cares Mark, the adolescent protagoni5t of e novel,

who lives in medieval Europe, in the shadow of "the Moun— he gives us ir-Sight into that character, whem Mark calls Th
tain," near a royal forest and a Christian shrine Called Boar, and another, Slellf Ganelon, as well by paj_rj_ the
saint Agnes‘ Fouhtain. From this brief identification and two men with their choices of knivesd I ng Q
location comes Wolfe's story of the time when Christianity Wolfe uses the typical rhythm and fluidity of his sen-
and the old religion coexisted in Europe. tences to de$0F1be eCtlOn and character rather than to draw
Out of Wolfe's decision that the protagonist would be setting, so often dreaded by teen—age readers. Describin
an adolescent came the novel's shape as an adolescent novel. the sudden death of the peddler in the novel's Prol ueg
Typically, adolescent novels feature teen—age protagonists wolfe writes: og ’
with whcxn readers can identify; vocabulary, sentence struc-
ture, plot, and meaning must be straightforward without It was as though he had been struck a blow and
being simple-minded to satisfy readers who are characteris— he never actually knew it was an arrow; but he
tically impatient yet mindful of their developing sophis— saw his pack lying alongside him in the dust
tication. More importantly, adolescent novels tend to end his Own red blood on the road——ahd, tor thé
grapple with the kinds of moral dilerrmas thrust upon teen- moment, the peddler saw himself '
agers specifically and human beings generally. The trick With ether boys in the streets oäspi-agääfunmng
here is to avoid pedantry and preaching. While adolescent (Prolegue, p. 12, DF)
novels that fulfill these qualifications in a vivid and sig-
nificant way are more difficult to write than they may ap- 'Ihe long sentence builds up a rhythm through its use of
pear, Wolfe succeeds without any suggestion of flatness or ?iPetiti0'£· beth of Words ("and," "hoy") and Of Sounds
triviality. ying, a ongside). Wolfe also sets up a pattern of
Mark is the major reason for the b0ok‘s success as an stresses, each unit of the sen ' · ·
adolescent novel because he manages to be normal without Stfesses ("It was es though he had tserähe sitäxlélyga Stifowmaähä
being mediocre. An orphan and therefore isolated as many of he Eye! actually knew it was an arrow-- nd Egg mO_
Wolfe‘s boy characters are, Mark seems to have adjusted to mhh-_th€ Peddlet @ himself as E-goy running [with Otß
the COl']ditiOl’1 of without a or a Ccxhfortable @,8 lh the Spreets Of PragU9") Indeedy such €IT1phaSj_$—UpOn
life, AS a medieval peasantl MaIk,S inadequate Card__ndS number of stresses rather than upon number of syllables
always hungry and usually c0ld——dOeS not set him apart ffOH\ parallel? earlY English P0€t!'Y· This is a refinement that
Others, and the typicality Or his plight Causes him td ac- pleases literateurs without thrusting itself upon the atten-
Qstrangexnent and ways to Copg seeing C100 of adolescent K‘€ad€K°S HÜYG interested in character and
himself as a martyr. His ability to cope, the ways he Pl0t·
scrounges for food, clothing, and adequate bedding, Another literary refinement that younger readers will
delineate his character and make it interesting to people also ?hjOY is W0lte°S use of balances and opposites that
who take the satisfaction of their basic needs for granted. desmtlhe Swiftly in a way both prgvocative and Vivid
Modern readers recognize and share Mark's burgeoning n Désctlblnq Mark after a day with the hidhwayman wat wdlfd
sexuality while they admire him for his use of reason in a SaYS* '
world where reason is rare. Normal and identifiable, Mark
is also admirable and exotic. He was in that state of fatigue in which objects
Wolfe adjusts his style to suit an adolescent audience seem unnaturally sharp--as though swimming in
as wel1,hand he does so without condescension. Arcanle wrgégä gleär äiéwzggand ideas invincibly evasive. (Ch.
attract im: they lend mystery and strangeness to t e - · ,
he so skillfully creates in his writing. Rather than give „U
up such Vocabulary in The Devil in a Forest, Wolfe, whe thmat“ÜallY_ShaVP°°* thet seems a familiar enough phrase,
knows that a medieval setting demands medieval details, uSeS Häugh its llk€‘h?SS te °°Swi¤minQ in Clear Syrup" is new; but
a few words with which a teen—ager might not be familiar, it "¥“°lblY €VdSlVer” its balanced opposite, arrests Us with
but he tactfully explains them in the course of furthering MaikJ“xtaP0S1tlOn of finality with ihdegihitdneSS_ Later
plot or developing character. In Chapter Fourteen, Wolfe mail_ dieams ef the heffew Man clothed in crumblihg Chain
defines "dirk" and compares it to "misericorde" through the hd b' i;h€_mh9S had turned to greenness in their decay, as
voice of a professional soldier (p. l45, DE'). In so doing, I S did ln health" (Ch. 9, p, 104, Dp)_ Mineral and
44 45
_
o lives in ieval rope, in the shadm of ''the n-
tain,'' 3r a roal forest and a Christian shrine called
Saint nes' Fntain. Fr this brie identiEication and
locatim s lfe's sto of e tine when mistianity
and the old religion xisted in rOpe
Out o tblfe's decision that the potagonist ld
an adolescent cane the novel's shape as an adolesnnt vel.
ically, adolescent novels feature tn-age protagonists
with wh readers can identify; vabulary, sentenn struc-
ture, plot, and meani must straightfoard withot
bei s' leinded to satisfy reade who are characteris-
tically itient yet mirtdful of their developing sophis-
ticatiOn, more importantly, adOlescent novels tend to
gapple with e kinds o{ al diles thst upon tn-
agers specificaly and hn beiqs generally me trick
here is to avoid pedantry and preaching Mhile adolescent
vels that fufill these qualifications in a vivid and sig-
niicant way are re difficult to write than they y ap-
ar Wolfe succeeds without any suggesti of flatss or
tiviality
mak is the jo eason fO the book's success as an
adolesnt novel cause he manages to be noal without
ing nediocre. An ohan and theref Ore isolated as many of
lfe's characters are, mark snG tO have adjusted to
e cOndition o being without a family or a comotable
life. As a nedieval asant, Mark's inadequate carehe's
always hungry and usually cold-s not set him art fr
others, and the typicality of his plight causes him to ac-
npt his estrangenent and find ways to co without seeiq
himself as a martyr. His ability tO cope, the way5 he
scrOunges fo food, clathing, and adequate bedding,
delineate his characte and mak3 it inteesting to ople
WhO take the satisfaction of their basic needs fo granted
odern readen recognize and share mark'e burgeoning
sexuality ile they admi' e him fOr his use ot- eason in a
rld where reason is rare. onnal and identi{iable, Mark
is also admi'rable and exotic.
t4le adJusts his style tO suit an adolescent audience
a5 well , and he does so without condescensi On Arca rds
attact him: they lend nyste and strangeness to the
he so skillfully create5 in his writing. Rather than give
up such vocabulary in Th-e Devil in a Forest, Wolfe, whO
knms that a nedieval 5etting demands nedieval details, uses
a few words with yhich a teen-ager might not be familiar,
but he tactfully elains t,em in the mrse Of furthering
plot or developing characte. In Chapter Fourteen, Molfe
defines ''dirk'' and caes it to ''misericorde'' thrgh the
ice Of a pro{essional soldier (p l45, F). In so dOing,
44

__ t _ _
i'ves us ght ntO at chaacte, wh ttak calls me
r, and anOtherI SieUr nelOnI as well, iri the
t n Mith ei OiCeS Of knives.
lfe uses e typical chyUm and fluidity of his sen-
tens to deScri aCti On and chaactef cathe than to daw
setti, sO Often dreaded bY teen-a9e eadefs sCfibi
te sudden death Of the peddler in the ravel's Prolue
lfe writeti
It was as thOugh he had been 5truck a bla3 and
he ve actually k it was an arm; but he
saw his pack lyi alOngside him in the dust,
and his r l On the rd--and, for the
nt the peddler saw hinGelf as a y nning
ith Other boys in the steets of Prague,
(Prole, p, l2, DF)
me long sentence builds up a rhytm through its use of
epetition bOth Of wOrds (''and,'' ''boy'') and of sounds
(ying, alOngside) Molfe also sets up a patten o
stresses, each unit Of the sentence having six majo
stresses (''It was as th h he had been stck a lm, and
he neve actuallY knew it was an acrm'' o ''and, for a -
nt, the peddle saw hiTrGelf as a bo running wit other
ys in the streets of a e''). Indeed , such ehasis upOn
number of stresses rather than upon number of syllables
parallels early English t. mis is a cefint that
pleases liteateus witht thsting itsel un the atten-
ti On Of adolesCent readen ce inteested in chaacter and
plot.
mother litera refinenent that youngec ceade will
al enjoy is Molfe 's use of balances and opsites that
describe swiftly in a way both provocative and vivid,
sccibing mark after a day with the highwayman Mat, le
says:
He was in that state O fatigue in which objects
sm unnaturally sharp--as though swinmirq in
clea syand ideas invincibly evasive. (Ch.
8, p. 99, )
UtUrally sham''. that see a filia enough phraee,
gh its likeness to "swiing in clea 5yrup'' is new, but
lnVlncibly evasive,'' its balanced p0site, arests us with
ltS jUxtaposition of finality with indefiniteness. Latef
ma dreams of the Barow man cloth in cling chain
lli ''the ings had tucned to greenness in thei decay,
hebs did in health" (ch. g, p. l04, DF). mineral and
45

vegetable decay and growth are compared in a succinct yet . that is both Cohvihei d
complex waY through a sentence that balances oPDOSites. ung Ch Can make it AS ng ag accurate to the alten? thät
Wolfe develops characters swiftly and forthrightll/« n resääed te create aworldgf_;;n izhiätipnggtthf lmagtnahlon ls
taking care to give even minor characters the complexity leqahseht ag ig required to create ho Our ec nology
that will spark them with life. In Chapter One he devotes a lsval Of technology ie Oheolete H Ogédw am Our present
full page to the description of Cope, the blacksmith, in- Reservation Clothing manufa tw l P€ODl€ hähdlö food
ciuamg copee physical appéarance <'·a belly not soft um Pr mw betete remgeration C “?€' °°“‘“‘P‘"‘°‘¢"“°'?· ‘?"d
Josellen's father's paunch, but hard as gristle"), his ge5— Sec Ö b 1 ' Sewlng machlnesr Prlhtlng
u · · · ‘ ' u · '  OWS
tures ( pushing it [his hair] back with one hand ), his cus— ägjgjheti iäged tilhleäraIno;rlaalmlSiÜ1eswk?;xf§ngS?1e e how meddlevaä
,. - v r even reame
tone (Ihe was the most regular worshipper at gt. Agnee' ef thg technology we now take for granted. Like the
chapel ), his demeanor ( a childish sullenness ), and his · hCe__tietiOh writer h a .
impact upon Mark ("it sometimes seemed to Mark . . . that Sil; tellihg rather th ethoes Sol ln the Course Of nomal
„ O " an roug ong passages of explana—
Cope shook the ground as he went home ) (Ch. l, p. 14, DF). h ae a histe er - .t .
Ever after Cope behaves consistently with this description, lo I wolfe incorrigoratiiläixsergäeaiähmäggttdo°a. l . .
yet he surprises us as well. Wolfe sketches all the charac— the Situatiohs Of the Characters whose Siorrrislega .llf€ ln
ters through similarly forthright description, consistent W 1 h h d h h - . 9 lnl/€ntS'
action and plausible surprise and like Cope they are all 9 ear OV an w·€re t G mnkeeper Stcres his food ln the
mixturés Of good and evil ' ' ' tourse gf gis seéving meals to the townspeople, to Wat, and
' _ _ ater, o 1eur ane on and his men. Mark is an a rentice
The novel‘s plot also mixes good and evil. An outlaw, te a Weaver and late J ll k . _ pp
Wat murders innocents, yet he behaves gallantly and kindly learn about clothin; mgiinfjgtgiees arglatue thus, we
toward many. ·Th1s ambivalent charactertproposes an &Il1* that a peddler served as the medieval näwspgger Sggälls
b1valent bargainz he will cease robbing pilgrims on their reporting the news as he moved from place to lalce Thy
way to St. Agnes‘ Fountain and thus bring prosperity back to ·l·t· th t Ma kl - . .p ' , 9
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ mi 1 ia a r s fellow villagers form 15 their only in-
the tiny village if the villagers will help him in one last adequate, security against robbers I
robbery before he guits the region. The enacting of this These hqnely details k  ' ' ‘
plan, its complications and its aftermath, combined with the edge of survival, yetevliieä [wliCtthUr€r;;tl;fi·l;V€d.On
elements of romance and implications of witchcraft, provide derived from each successful and ordinarygtriump: lsläcizéog
the story's plot. I The combination of robbery and intrigue life made busy not only by everyday concerns and periodie
with rcmance and witchcraft would have strong appeal tor troubles, but by the fact that it is lived during a time
öÖOl@SC€‘V¤t f@öÖ€FS· when pagan and Christian reli ions '
. . · _ ted. The nature of
The novel‘s plot does more than titillate, however; it their coexistence ' w lf « Q ~ Cqexls.
is the vehicle for two lessons which Wolfe suggests rather we think eflsthe) midäensifrwhligorlcal COHCQFW
than pronounces. Through Mark's experience with Wat, charm- Rcxnan Catholicism, represented pefrlha sas b-m€HdOmma;§€d bi
ing yet cruel, and the Abbe, reserved yet kind, he learns l celebration of the Virgin Butrdes it Plrt Y _d@nry dams
that it is unwise to follow thoughtlessly those people or medieval Ch ' t' ‘ .· P G a.er 1 eallzatlonsl
_ _ _ _ r1s 1an1ty still contended with the old nature
notions most attractive or popular. Instead, he learns to rgllglons and the · t . . .
rely upon his own reason to determine that which is good and flow with the overrjliglmriixagm gjrgittiilf Ssmlganie dld nct
to follow it, though good and evil are often intertwined. Country life. Markt Village is dee in te ac vhaters of
Neither Mark nor the reader is told about these lessons. Close against the forest fence ang peo leehavaec nwitersl
The actions of the novel lead Mark to incorporate them in pletely abandoned the old ways there' D o com
hisbehavior and the reader 1S led to agree with Mark's Mgther Cloot and Wat represent the old religion, while
deC1Sll;;Srrod ern notions the rationality of Mark's behavior Sigi Axäiiethanb? wsths alter ego, Sieur Ganelom represent the
_ ¤ _ _ _' ar overin_ b t th ' ‘
might make him seem anachronistic, yet Wolfe works to which way is hiS_ Mothgr äloiieleliivggoinfoticesfdecldmg
present an accurate view of the early middle ages. That magic and believes herself to be a witch thou he shärces S;
this science—fiction writer would write a work of historical merely insane or addicted to drugs Shela aäs t h
fiction is not surprising. Both science fiction and his- Primal ingtinctg in ner manipulations· ppso reife ls
torical fiction require the writer to create a foreign set- Vengeance, and the impulse te pteeerve OheS sel? °§a'e,Stä_;
t t
vegetable decay and grth ae c anpa ed in a succinct yet
c lex way thgh a sentence that balances o ites.
WOlfe develops charactecs swiftly and focthightly,
taking cae to give even minor chacactes the complexity
that will s k th with life n Chapte 0ne he devotes a
ull a ge to the descipti m Of C , the blacksmith, in-
cludi C ope 's physical ap aance (''a be lly nOt sot like
os ellen's fathe's pa unch, but hacd as gristle''), his ges-
tu Fes (''pushi it lhis hail ba ck with on e hand''), his cus-
t (''he was the most regular wOrshippe at St, Agnes
chapel''), his demeanor (''a childish sullenness''), and his
iTma ct upon mark {''it s tiTces s ned to IYark . that
C sh k the g ou nd as he went h '') (Ch. l, p l4, ).
EveF afte Co pe be haves consistently with this de sciption,
yet he su rises us as we ll. lfe sketches all the chaac-
ters though similaly fothrig_ht desciption, consistent
aCtOn, and laU5lble SU r5e, and, like C , they are all
mixtures of g and evil.
The novel's plot al so mixes and evil An outlaw,
Mat muders in ae nt5, yet he be haves gallantly and kindly
towad many This ambivalent chacactec pro es an am-
bivalent bargain: he will cease robbing pilgrims on their
way to St. Ag nes' F ou ntain a nd thus bring pcos pe ity ba ck to
the tiny village if the villagers will helD him in one last
ob be fore he qu its the region m e enacting O this
plan, 3tS COmeliCati OnS and tS aEte th, C anb lned Wlth
elents of ana nce and iqlications ot- witchccaft, prOvide
the sto ry 's plot m e c omb ination ot- ob be ry a nd intigue
with nce and witchcaft would have strOng appeal tOr
adolescent readecs
m e vel's plot d oe s ce than titillate, h me ve it
is the vehicle for two lessons which Mo l Ee suggests athe
than ro rm ns. mra3gh mark'sexpcrience witWat,cha-
i ng yet c ru el, and the Ab , eserved yet kind, he lear
that it is unwise to follm thoughtles5ly those peOple O
notions nDs t attfaCtive Oc po ßular, Instead he learnS tO
ely un his axn eason to teine that which is g and
to Eoll it, though good and evil ae often intetwined,
ithe Mark nor the ceader is told about these lessOns.
The actions of the novel lead Ma k t in ate them in
his havior and the eadec is led to agee with mack'S
decisions.
en notions, the ationality of ma k's be haviOr
might make him seem anachronistic, yet MOlfe wOrks tO
present an accurate view o the early middle ages hat
this science-fiction wciter w ou ld wite a wo k Of histOriCal
fiction is not suisiq. th science fictiOn and hS-
toical ficti on e0 ice the wite to cceat a fOeign set-
46

that is bo th c Onvinci and accurate to the extent th at
5eafch can ke lt 9eat a leaD Of the l9inatl On i5
uir to create a mrld c which nDs t of our techlo9y
, aent as is ui tO ceate one where ou pesent
evel of teChnOl OY iS ObSOlete. H did Pe Ople handle f
resevation, ClOthln9 manuactu Ce, Co nm uncatiOn and
secufity befOe etl9efatlOn, SeWin9 maChlneS, ,lntln9
fesses, a nd burgla alarms? WOl Ee sh OwS h medieval
a5ants lived thel nO nna l lves havi n9 neve even dce ane d
f the technOl Ogy n take f O ganted, ike the
scienfictiOn wrter, he dOe s sO in the cOuse Of nO l
so -telling athe than thrOugh long passages of explana-
tion, a5 a hi5tO O SClenCe lter might dO.
l{e in ates his esearch a bo ut ne dieval lie in
the situations Of the characters wih ose stories he invents.
e lean h m and whee the innkee , stores his ood in the
course 0f hS Senrlng TTeal5 tO the tmnSpeOle, tO Wat and
later, to Sieur Ganel On and his nR n. mark i5 an apprentice
to a weaver, and later JOsellen na kes him a c 0a t: thus, we
learn about c30thing manufacture, The prologue shs us
that a ped dler seved as the medieval newspaper, oally
reporting the news as he moved Ean place to place me
militia that Ma k'5 fell viJlagers fo is theic only, in-
ade qu ate, secucity against rob be rs
m ese h aTe ly details evoke a picture of life lived on
the edge Of survival, yet liv ed with great satist-action
de rived f an each 5uccessful and o,dina ti uq h. It is a
lie made busy n Ot Only by everyday concer and peiic
trbles, but by the fact that it i5 lived during a time
en pagan and Chistian religions cxisted. me natue of
theic c xistence is Wolfe's jor histoical concern.
W think of the medieval world as one d inated by
R n CathOlicism, represented, perhaps, by Henry Adams'
Celebration oE the Virgin. t despite later idealizations,
medieval Christianity still contended with the old natue
eligions, and th e instre am o Catholic d inance did not
l Ow with the overwhelming foce into the backwaters o
0 nt life, mark's village is deep in the backwaters,
ClOSe against the forest fence, and people have not c-
Pletely a ba ndon ed the old ways there.
ther Cl t and Mat represent the old religion, wh ile
the and Matls alte ego, ieur Ga nelon, repre5ent the
neW, With yak hoveing between the two forces decidin
ich way i5 his. mother cl t be leves in the fofces of
9lC a lieves hefself to be a witch, though she y be
rely insane o addicted to dgs. 5he apals to selfi5h
lmal in5tincts in her manipulations. t gce, sx,
Venance, and the i ulse to fese,ve ones self. wat, t_v
4ì

outlaw, shows that her world view is shared by a young, _
vigorous, and charismatic man: it is not simply the view of hie final Fobhefif Seheme, and the location of Josellen's
a Ci'aZY old woman- hidihg PlaCe· The TTTYSÜGKY novel form requires the use of
The Abbé is the logical representative of the new Yeaaonr ef oohteer by Which the detective sorts clues and
religion of compassion and reason since he is its repre— indUCeS SOl¤tiOnS- AS in the Father Brown mysteries,
sentative for the community by St. Agnes' Fountain. The however, reason moves at a deeper level as well. Through
Abbe's stand does not have the impulsive appeal of Mother reason, good defeats evil. shares
Cloot's, but its fairness and kindness attract the confused thle Use ef the mYsteVY noVel to probe the deeper mysteries
adolescent boy. Sieur Ganelon, the man of law (whose other Of the nature ef good and evil- In "The Blue CrOSS," Father
side is Wat the outlaw), illustrates the hard cruelty of the ßr¤~¤ saYs‘
new reason when it is divorced from compassion. _
Wolfe makes clear his belief that the new religion of Reason ls alwal/S teaeenable- - . . I know that
reason and compassion is the force of good and that Mother people ehe}-ge the church with lowei’in9 feaeeh,
Cloot and Wat have much of evil in them, but he does not but lt ls Jost the ether way. Alone on earth,
clarify the sides of good and evil until we have lived with the chhreh makes Feaeeh really supreme. Alone
the characters awhile. At first the Abbe seems quite a Oh earth, the Church affirms that God himself is
sinister figure, cold and aloof, Mother Cloot a feeble old hound hY reason·(l)
woman condemned by superstition, and Wat a Robin Hood. _ _
Gradually we learn that, while these first impressions have That whlch ls _tVulY reasonable ie good and that which deniee
truth in them, they do not help us determine where good and reason ls e"ll· Thhe dOeS Father Brown unccver tho
evil lie. Pity and charismatic attraction do not lead us c’Yh“lnel Thus does Mark deeipher Wat's true nature and mo-
inevitably to good, a tricky lesson that Mark eventually tlvesr and thue does he find and rescue the woman whqn he
learns. Further, Wolfe shows that evil people may also leVee° _ He learns te Use Feaeoh from the Abbe, the repre—
deserve pity or be unjustly condemned, as Mother Cloot is, senhatlVe ei the Chhfeh, and reason teaches him to trust
and that evil people may Sometimes dd good, as wat does in both the Abbe and the Church. Reason solves both the lesser
helping the forest people. The evil of these characters anc che greater ml/eteYiee~
lies in the impetus of their actions, impulse and instinct, _ The Path Y-’eaSOn takes to come to reasonable conclu-
and in the focus of their concerns, which is purely selfish. slonsq thoddh net blatahtly obvioue, is mefe CleaflY marked
Wolfe's historical novel places the battle between then In weifele adult fiction, more eo especially than the
good and evil on the ground where Christianity and the old path Severlan fellwe in · NeVerthe’
nature religions coexisted in medieval Europe. On this lees' the adoleaeent noVel and the ComPleX tetFaloQY Share
ground the Christian shrine of St. Agnes' Fountain stands somehaeie ehafaeteristics, as if were
near the pagan shrine Miles Cross. The Christian black- a trlal run fo'? the more Cemplex work. One can draw paral-
Smith, cope, reminas us, in his strength and mythic Size, er lele between the two beoke i¤ their pretaqenists, their set-
the pagan Spirit, the Barrow Man Mark„S Village lies On tings, and their thematic concerns with faith and reason.
the border between the cultivated farmlands of the Christian Merk and Severian are in Similar r><>eitio¤s= both are
folk and the forests where the pagan charcoal burners live. orhhans aPPi‘entlCed to trades, Mark to a weaver and Severian
Mark and Josellen live where the old and new confront one te the e<>r¤¤rere' Qhild· Eaeh eepee well With his situation
another both geographically and philosophically, and part of though the world in which he lives is difficult and dau-
their growing up consists of growing from the immature im- gerou_s· Eaeh is drawn to an outlaw, Mark to war and
pulsiveness and selfishness of the old religion, as it is heverlan ee V<>dal¤S, and eaeh P¤ZZleS over the O¤tlaW'S, and
represented here, to the more mature reason and kindness of ls own: moral nature. Mark and Severian comprise a par-
ChriStianity_ ticular type of Wolfe's isolated child: orphaned, vul—
Not only does the use of reason catalyze The Devil in Irtäieble because ef the hareh world in whieh he liVee¤ Yet
a Forest as a historical novel but it drives its action as a . mg a sane adlhetment to hiS condition, each a Survivor
mystery novel as well. The Devil in a Forest is something wlth a developing metal SenSe-
of a Father Brown mystery in medieval garb. Wolfe sets up _Thohdh MaFl<°S Wefld liee in OU! Paet and Severian's in
several mysteries: Wat's true identity and the nature of gut cistantiüthfe and Mark's lies somewhere in Eurgpe while
everian's is somewhere in South America, in some important
48
49
_ __
Outlaw, shms that he world view is shared by a young
vigOrous, ar3d chaisn3atic n3an it is t sil the view oe
a crazy old wanan.
The Abbé is the lOgical representative ot the new
eligion Of cssiOn and eas On since he is its repre
sentative for the cOmmunity by St nes' Fountain. me
be's stand does nOt have the ilsive appeal of Mothe
Cloots, but its fairness and kindness attract the conused
adolescent bOy Sieur Ganelon, the n of law (whose othe
side is Wat the outlaw), illustrates the had cuelty of the
n eason en it is divoced fr cssion.
l{e makes clear his belief that the rRw religion o
easOn and cssiOn is the f Orce of g and that ther
CloOt and Mat have much of evil in them, but he ds not
clarify the sides of g and evil until we have lived with
the chacactes awhile. At fist the Ab>e seems 0ite a
SiniSter i9Ure, COld and al, m Other Clt a feeble Old
w Oman cOndemned by superstitiOn, and Wat a Robin Hood.
Gadually we learn that, while these first iressions have
truth in them, they do not help us deteine where g and
evil 1ie. Pity and charismatic attraction do not lead us
inevitably to good, a ticky lessOn that mark eventually
learns. Futhe, Ole shows that evil peOple may also
deserve pity o be unjustly coemned, as ther Clt is,
and that evil pele y stis do g, as at ds in
helping the Eoest people The evil o these characters
lies in the iqetus of thei actions, iulse and instinct,
and in the fus of their concerns, ich is purely selfish.
MOlfe's histOrical novel places the battle between
and evil on the gound where Christianity and the Old
nature religions coexisted in medieval EurOpe. On this
grnd the Christian shrine o St. Agnes ' Fountain stands
near the pagan shrine miles Cr Oss me Chistian black-
smith, CO reminds us, in his strength and mythic size, O
the pagan spirit, the Bar man Mak's village lies On
the rder between the cultivated annlands of the Christian
folk a the forests where the pagan chac0al buners live
mark and Josellen live where the old and new conEront One
anOthe both graphically and philOsOphically and part Of
their grmiq up consists of gring fr the ' ture im-
pulsiveness and selfishnes5 of the old religion, as it is
represented hee, to the TTDre tue eason and kindnss Of
Christianity.
t only ds the use oE eason catalyze me vil in
a Forest as a historica1 novel but it dives its action aS a
ystery novel as well me vil in a Forest is sthin9
o a Fathe Br mystery in rrRdieval garb. Mole sets UP
several mysteries: Wat's true identity and the nature Of
48

___
his final rObbery scheme, and the lati On Of Jellen's
hiding place me ste nOve3 O requies e u Of
reasOn, Of COUrSe, by iCh the deteCtive sOrt5 ClUeS and
induceS SOlUtiOnS in the Fathe BOwn mySteieS,
Vef, eaSOn VeS at a dee leVel aS ll mrOU9h
reason, 9OOd defeatS eVll The Vil in a FOeSt Shae5
i' s use of the nyste vel tO pobe the deepe mysteries
of the natue Of g a evil In ''me Blue Cross , '' Fae
Bn SayS i
Reason is always reasonable . , I knm at
people charge the Church wi ling reason,
but it is just the other way. None on earth,
the Church makes eason really supene. None
on eath, the Church affirms that G0d hinGelf is
bound by eason (l)
mat which is truly reasonable is gOod and that which denies
reason is evil. Thus does Father Brown uncover the
ciminal. mus ds Mak deciphe Wat ' s te nature and rrD-
tives, and thus ds he find and escue the n wh he
loves. He leans to use eason f the Abbe , the eprem
sentative of the Church, and reason teaches him tO trust
th the Ab and e Church. Reason eolves both e lesse
and the geater steries.
The path eason takes to ae to reasonable conclu-
sions, though nOt blatantly obvi Ous, is nDre clearly maked
than in Wolfe's adult fiction, nDre so especially than e
path Seveian follms in me k of the Mew Sun. verthe-
less , the adolescent novel and the lex tetaly shafe
s basic characteistics, as i me vil in a Foest wee
a trial n for the rae clex rk. e can draw paral-
lels tween the t ks in their protagonists, their set-
tis, and their them3tic ncens with faith and reasOn
rk and verian are in similar positions bOth are
Orphans appenticed to tades , Mark to a weaver and Severian
tO e torturers' guild. Each copes well with his situati On
thgh e rld in which he lives is difficult and dan-
9erOus. Each is drawn to an outlaw, mark tO Mat and
Severian to Valus, and each p1zzles over the outlaw's, and
his n, raal nature. mark and verian rise a pa-
ticular type of Wolfe's isolated child: orphaned, vul-
nerable because of the har5h world in which he lives, yet
ing a sane adjusnt to his ndition, each a suvivor
With a developing raral sen5e.
mough Fbk's rld lies in r past and Severian's in
r distant utue and mak's lie5 swhere in EufO while
verian's is Whee in sth Anerica, in 5 irtant
Q9

· a rt. Each lives in a hiQhlY V1]
ways may do noäaäe Villixizfdägd Liinto castes, Structured into
StFatlfa?i Sogide yénif between rich and POOIW educatad and 5}-}(R·l~ WCRKS
aThough Severian's world contains techrioloigy of
iimense sophistication, that technololgä Mläsekugeväg :1 laioro
most E;?;pä;er;tniin$heä1;rE?;lrigäieval Wdfld is almost as Short stories and novellas form a large and exciting
glgiiirnsge to us as Sever-‘ian°$ flitura ?Ü€°it;)n;€E Vtääiegiä portion of Gene Ä/7Oä§e'?1 ioäk-AOned, "'I‘he Detehth of [botortä5—
the s cia pecu iar . land, receive e e u a war ; many o ers, among em
äiiggcgelie rfigüä-ägiinvääve feläe more oonfident lof ««Tne Island Of Doctor lbath and Other. St0rieS," “Th€ Fifth
meoieval EurOm though the final öf¢hlt€CtUr€ 15 qm 6 American Nights," have been nomineted fer Hllgos and Nebu]_aS_
ferenb h New Sun wolfe's stories more Cormonly make their first appearances
The Devil in a FO1f€St and in anlZhOlOQl€S fäthéf than ln magazlnes, thollgh short
Snare giffaraät Säin aädbäeä/iriag sgggiesnnave ääöpeäred féairly frequiantlyf ienlygagazineitginci
' en faith an reaso ' _ 1 . oco ec ions ormasampero o esso wor
iäädcäggäcäiggybiaggingly Süpernaturäl säen; wläighéägstäää for read@I‘S wh? wilsh toi foléow llis skillful and deliiate
scme rational exp ana io . manipulation o t ese eman ing iterary forms. 'I‘he Is and
ääieiggfizgäid gkäiisth, but strengthenö i_‘Z as each moves fig- of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories, (T100),
ther from belief in superstition and its- attendantFcrule4a!-ä hien was ouolieneo es en original oaporbaok by Pocket in
to belief in reason and its attendant kmd“aSai_ iäxs to lQ80, contains Wolfe's most important novellag after ··i·ne
the movement ie from the- olld natufa ref 19 the Old Fifth Head of Cerberus": "The Island of, Doctor Death" tr1l—
Catholicism, and for Severian ll'- 15 a JO‘·*r“aY ;°‘“wh_Ch the Ogyn 'Ti·aeklng gonglu ··l-ne Fyeflash Mlraclesn, and. „SeVen
Urth through which he travels to the New Sun o 1 American N1ghts." Iti also includes several of his best
Pelerines teach. _ ld and short stories: "Alien Stones," "The Hero as Werwolf"
The Devil in a Forest prefigufaa much Of th? wor not ("Werwolf" 15 Wolfe's personalized spelling), "Feather
the wo later tetralogy, but it äoesslm Tioereln and ··Toy ·l—neetei._· Gene wolfeS Book of Dans
have the eqnplexity and fiCh¤@SS Ot _ (GNBDL a l?8l Doubledaylhardback, is a more whimsical col-
The Devil in a Forest is, for _W¤lf@· a almpli howéveäl l€CtlFJD: with 1CS StOl:°1eS arranged acoording to their ap-
ected aUdl€DC€- Ia ls ne ' H way. ·PK'OD§laheneSS to Specific holidays. It includes fewer major
- listic One, nor is it ClC°UdOlY faSh1¤¤€d ln a Y I SÜOU-95 than TIOD and rrore humorous ones: among its prizeg
a Slmp eh e arance gf eimplicity proceedß from Wfalfe S are "The Adopted Father" (for Father's Day, naturally),
Ratber, 8 tppf. his machinations alfö Ski]-lfUllY lncc-Jr- "F0rlesen" (Labor Day), "The Changeling" (Homecoming Day),
thorough Fon 2% ° Sto without the roughneSS OF abmptnass and "Many Mansions" (Halloween). wolfe's most important un-
poratied into eel C¤ll€*Cüad Stories include "Remembrance to Come" (Damon
ef hls first no; éodest novel by a master, not the ¤n¢O“" g Knight's Orbit Six); "Westwind" (IF, August 1973); his
1S_a dellperateng work of an apprentice. "Thag" series, which includes "Dark o_i?the June," "The Death
Sclously lnnoce 7 of Hyle," "From the Notebook of Dr. Stein," and "Thag"
NOTE » (Roger Elwood's Continuum 1, g, 2, and 4); "The Detective of
_ Th Amazin Ad_ l $E@ar{1i'·' (Kirby McCauley's Dark Forc_és); and "The Last
 Cros$," in __i_______9_.... fl 1n Wonder Stor " Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction
‘” G"' °“€SZi”E»Z'ä„„T“§„„?„i„“e«New Yet Dai, 1958), P. , em Y ‘———————
ä The more than eighty—five works represent a wide range
 I of Gene Wolfe's techniques and concerns. To give a notion
I of their variety, I shall discuss them in a variety of ways.
E Chapter One formulated three categories for W0lfe's fiction:
; entertainments, sociological stories, and psychological
stories; several stories will be examined according to their
50 51
____ _
ays e1 do not lie ve far a. ch lives in a highy
Stratified SOCiety diVded intO CaSteS, Stn1CtUed intO
guilds with a wide gulf ten rich a c, educated and
uneduted. mgh veian's rld contains techl o
' nse sophistication, that technology is unavailable to
moSt peole, and thei SOCiet, like Ftark'S iS a la-
intensive atiOn, Mark 's dieval wOrld is almost as
strange to us as Severian's utu one. Once MOlfe hd
fnd he ald convey the special peculiaity o{ medieval
Europe, he might have felt mOe cOnfident of conveying
ve ianls uh i h is ilt u n a foundation simila
nedieval thgh the inal architectue is quite dif-
fent.
The Devil in a Forest and The Ok Of the ew Sun
share sinu' lar fndations o a different so: a belief in
e ction between aith and reason. Mark and Severian
find that eve seemingly supenatual event with which they
ace nffmted has s ational explanation, mis ds t
de5tr Oy thei faith, bUt Strerqthen5 t a5 eaCh EaVes far-
the Er lief in sutition and its attendant cruelty
to belief in reason and its attendant kindness. For Mark
the movement is from the 0d nature religi Ons to
Catholici, and for Severian it is a JrrRy f the old
Uh thrgh which he travels to the Yew Sun of which the
lerines teach
me vil in a Forest prefigures much o the world and
the WOrld VieW Of OlfelS latef tetral bUt it dS nOt
have te lexity and richness o m_e k of the Mew Sun,
The DeVil in a FOreSt is, O WOlfe, a Sile k, a'
prrlately fO itS p07eCted aUdlenCe. It iS nOt, hVerl
a silistic one, nor is it crudely {ashiomd in any way
Rather, e apearance O qliCity proceeds fran WOlfeS
thorough control: his machinations are skillfully incor-
porated into the sto witht the rghness or abnJptness
O hi5 firSt nOVelI D0^ati On ARES. m_e Vil in a FOest
is a deliberately st novel by a ster, not the uncon-
sciously innocent work of an appentice
E
(l) GK. CheStertOn, ''me BlUe CrS,'' in The AnaZi a -
ventures of Father (Yew York ll, l958), p,
20.
5O

_t _,l
VT
ST KS
Short stOies and novellas {o a lae a exciti
ion Of Gene MOl Ee's mrk. e, ''me ath o tO Is-
and,'' received the Mebula AHard; many othen, anarq th
me Island Of tOr ath a Othe Stories, "me Fifth
Head of Cerbeusl'' ''The Eyeflash iracles,'' and HSeven
rican Yights,'' ve n aninated for Hugos and Mebulas.
lfe's stOies e ny ke ei irst aparans
in anthOlOgies ather than jn magazines, though short
5tories have apared faily frequently in magazines 9ince
l979. llecti Ons fo a sler of lfe's sho rk
for eaden O wish to Eolow his skillful and delicate
nipulation Of these nding litera fonns. me Island
of tor ath and her Storie5 and Othe Stories (TIOD,
which was published as an original papeback by ket in
l980, contains lfe's nDst irtant novellas aEte ''The
Fifth Head O Cerrus'' "me Tsla of to aH til-
y, ''Tracking SOng,'' ''me Eyeflash iacles,'' and ''Seven
hrerican Mights.'' It also includes several of his best
shOrt stOries: ''Alien Stones,'' ''The Hero as Merwol'}
(''erwOlf'' is Molfe' pesonalized spelling), ''Feather
Tiges,'' and ''Toy Theate,'' Gene Molfe's Book of Da s
() a l98l bleday hardback, is a nDre whin6ical l-
lectiOn, with its stories ararqed accoding to their ap
' Pr Oiatenes5 to 5pecific holidays. Tt includes fer Jo
StOies than TIOD and re hwTarous ones: anang its pizes
4re ''The AdOpted Fathe'' (for Father's Day, naturally)
FOrlesen'' (r Day), ''me Changelirq'' (Hecoming Day)
a ''ny nsion'' (HallaFeen). MolEe's st itant un-
COllected stOries include ''Remembrance to Come'' (Damon
Kight's Orbit Six); ''Westwind" (3F, August l973),. his
g'' ser_ies, ich includes ''Dark the June," "me ath
Of HYe,'' ''Fr the yotebook o Dr. Stein," and "Thag"
(Re El's Continu l, 2, 3, and 4), "e tective of
0eams'' (Kirby_mccauieyis a Fore5), and "The Last
Thrilling wonder Story" (s_aac Asimov's scien Fiction
0aine, um l982).
me re than eighty-ive works represent a wide rarqe
Of ne WOl{els techniques and conrn. To gi a notion
O thei vaiety, T shall discuss them in a vaiiety o- ays.
Chapter One olated thee categories or lfe's fction.
entetainments, sociological stoies, and psycholil
St0ies; seveal stoies will exined accoding to tei
5l

. ~ Ories, Wolfe often twiäts Con" AS lighthearted as the gaming atnpsphere is, as giddy
relationsrälps teoasgäiiiäää and fantasy expectatiens te as the story‘s maneuvering makes us, it has something
ventiona Sind 1 will discuss several other Stdriee in serious embedded in it- Not only does the fictional Winston
Sgrprlsef uihair manipulation of COnVehtiOhal eXPeCtetj~O“S· Churchill pronounce a wise pair of epigrahiS-··diShOhaSty _ _
änänävozatiye mgtit of the isolated child rewrs ln wolfele , consists in violating rules to which one has , , , agreed_
f- - and I will explore its travele and t!?anSfd¤“eFlO“e· 1 simply proposed rules I felt would be advantageous, which
lctlonf thamatie Concerns recur in WC>lte°S Sterlee as is diplomaCy"——but "Unknown Soldier," as the fictional
wo majär Mtura ot humanity and the demefeetion Of Eisenhower signs himself, offers wolfe's warning about our
well---3.6 gathese too, will be expl0red· own future (D- 74, GNBD) Ike and his friend are about to
malltäan? wOlfQ'é entertainments are hie meet a¢¢eSSible· begin a new game of "World war" with the United states,
because least demanding, stories: least demanding for his Britain, and China opposing the U.S.S:R., Poland, llonania,
raadarsr that is, when Wolfe sets out te ehteftemv he Of' and several other Eastern European nations, There is every
fers the amusement of a clever and baroque game, and the danger that the world map, which forms the game board, will
StOry¤S Construction demands a great deal Of Sk1ll· How I be destroyed by coals from the players' pipes, just agntwg
Lost the Second World War and Helped Turn äack the Germain Japanese cities had been burnt off the map in their first
Invasion" (GNBD), hereafter known as "Plow, represänts ti gama_ H H r
typical Wolfe entertainment, though it is longer t_an mos y How conforms closely but not exclusively to the
(fourteen pages in GWBD). The story is filled with word typical characteristics of an entertainment: itlcontains
play: „rOy autoan tor Toyotas, People's Car fer V¤l¤<Sw¤¤@¤· traits of Wolfe's sociological and psychological fiction as
d race master ffjf [HaSt€r I-aC€ The Toyota pun trlggers W€l]. The embedded WaZ“f1]_I'|gS abOLjt QCQnOmiQS’ war, and
an t of the plot, the English translation of volkswagen nuclear destruction remind us of Wolfe's sociological con-
äiäays Our realization of its significancel and the reversel cerns Reality and fantasy weave in and out as they dg in
Or umaatar race·· defuses the ugliest side of world wer H ln the psychological stories, though the demarcationlis clearer
wa that rgflectß the function of the St¤tY as e ‘^’h°le‘ here to both readers and characters than it is in woltes
äumexfous historical allusions to the World Wars form a more psychological fiction. In the alternate world "How"
ies of punchlines, and the story ends without any feeling presupposes, make—believe——the war game——mimics the world we
Särambi Uity--we do not doubt the Ol-lteeme Of 'lwlght S know, while the economic war which is the 1938 "reality" of
ginal wir gam€_ · _ the story suggests our own contemporary reality (the story
Entertaininu aa the wgyd play, in—3okeS of h}StOrY¤ was written in l97l3 and. the hold Japanese cars have on the
and punchlingg are, do ÜOt form a Slmple ent€rtalnI“€nt' Iflarketl has not S].Ql'llflCB,nt.]_y changed Since
but a Very cqnplex one. °°HOW°° is an alter-nete world Store; IHOWH 15 game, an entertainment, lt makes serious points
that answers two "what—if" questioneä what _1f World wer I in a sophisticated yqay_ I .
had been fgught €COl'\QI\j.Cal].y rather than mllltarlly what? Whllél "Howl' ]_S QO[‘l(?9[n@d wlth econonucs and war-farel
if Hitler's madness had been benign rather than malignanté Wolfe's sociologicalstories more frequently warn us of the
but ·HOw¤ incorporatos another story 85 Well"the"StOfY_O_' Sl:·lb]UQöiElOVl of individualls by organizations ("Many Man-
world war II as nothing more than 8 Wet game- The whetüä 5lOhS," ln GNBD), the implications of technology ('The wonian
r and the war game story are told as e tettef te _t Q Whe Loved the Centaur Pholus"(l)), and the dangers which
S f Stratg ic game magazine by a nOn"ml]-ltary Ddlght threätéfl the W0r]_d's ecolqglcal Syste-m_ "Thr—e€ Mllllgn
ädltéä;aähO3er_ Tha "what—if" story tfigä-lets e race between Squafe Miles," "An Article About Hunting," and "Beautyland
British Cars, centurians, and the German Peolälege Ce;S'f;;;; éäll lh GWBD) explore the consequences of destroying wilder-
‘ ' interference——t a rac ss.
Japanese ägywäätgäniilgräglggpgllel the military Wet game weich _ "Beautyland" is a short and sordid tale that shows in
igaeiälaäg Simnltaneously. The race "tel-’eCaStS“ the Umted Just five pages what becomes of people who care nothing for
3tates present economic relationship with Ge¤“anY end gew; Dreservatioh og wilder-naaS_ Wolfe avokas rather than
wnila the military game duplicates the teet1eel_aC‘¢H‘ellä¥e deeeribes a future with harsh Clarity--an America wjrthgut
Of world war li, The story is as t¤°ehetlC_l“ Its Jugg 123 Qarkland, every inch developed. The sociological warning of
of plots and parallels as the little cars which dodge arou Beantylanan 15.50 fundamental to th? Srory thät every ala_
One another during the rage, meht points to it. No games or ambiguities dilute its in-
52 53
relatiships to these categories lfe Often twists n-
vention4l science-icti On a fantasY exctatiO to
sui us, a I will discuss seveal Othef stOries in
te of thei manipulation of 0ventiOnal ectations.
me evtive tif of the isOlated child ecus in MOlfe's
fiction, a I will exploe its travels and taMfOrmations.
Two jor t.ematic concerns recu in Olfe's stOries as
ell--the natun of humanity a the demarcation of
reality"and the5et tOOt Will be elOr
l ' h' i
becaUse least dendirq stOfieSi leaSt dending fO his
readefS, that iS. en lfe 5et5 OUt tO enterta1nt he Of-
fers e senent o a cleve and baOque game and the
st.o's coMtruction denands a geat deal OE 5kill. ''H T
t the Second World War and Helped Turn 8ack the Gean
Invasion'' (BD), heeafte knam as ''Hm,'' repesents the
tCal lfe entertaintt thOU9h it lS lOn9er than t
(fouteen pages in GWBD). The stO is filled wi rd
play-: ''toy aut'' {or Toyotas, People's Ca fOr VOlksagen,
and ace ste fof ste ace me TOyOta pun tiggers
part of the plot, the English translati On Of VOlkswagen
delays r realization of its significance, and the reversal
of ''stef ace'' defuses e ugliest side Of rld Wat II in
a way that reflects the unction o the story as a whOle.
Meous histoical allusiOns to the Ofld Mars fOrm a
series of punchlines, and the story ends withOut anY feeling
of iguity--we do not dOubt the outc Ome Of ''ight 's'
final wa g
Entetaining as the word play, in-jokes Of histOy,
and nchlines afe, they do not o a sile entetaint,
but a ve canplex one. ''H'' is an altenate rld stOry
that answes two ''what-if'' questions what if rld Wa I
had n fought ecnically rathe than militarilY and at
i Hitle's dness had been nign ather than malignant:
t ''Hm'' incorates anothe story as well--the stOry Of
rld Wa IT as nothing re than a war g, me ''what-if'
sto and the war gane sto are tOld as a letter tO the
editor of a strategic gane magazine by a nonilita ight
D. Eisee. me ''what-i'' sto ti99ers a race twn
8itish cars, Centuians, and the Gennan Pe Ople's CaK, with
ase toy aut pfoviding inteference--that race fOrmS
an econic war g to parallel the milita war g which
Ike plays simultaously. me race ''oecasts'' e United
States ' pesent econic relationship with ny a Jan
ile the ' lita gane duplicates the tactical actualitieS
o Morld War II. me sto is as frenetic in i jugglin9
o plots and allels as the little cas ich dOdge ar
one anothe duing the race.
52

As lightheated as the gami a phere is, as giddy
as the StOfy'S maneUVel ng makeS u5, it ha5 SOmethig
seri5 ded ln lt. t OnlY doeS the fiCti Onal WinStOn
curchill pOnOunce a wise paic of epigc an6 ''dishonesty..
. c m sists in vi Olati ng les to wh ich one has . , ageed.
5imply prOpOs les I felt m ld advantageous, which
is dipl OmacY''--ut ''Unkn Own SOldiec,'' as the fictional
Eisem ef SignS hlelf Ofes WOlfe's waning aut Ou
futue (p. 74, BD). Ike and his friend ae a t tO
gin a new ga Of ''MOrld War'' with the Unit ed States,
Bitain, and China OP si n9 the U.S,S.R., Poland, R ana nia,
and seveal Othe Easten O pe an nations. m ee is eve
danc that the mrld p, ich fo nrG the g arre d, will
deStOyed by C lS f the layeS' i 5 Ju5t aS two
apanese cities had be en burnt oEf the ma p in thei Eist
gane,
''How'' confocms closely but not exclusively to the
typical characteistics Of an entertai nt it contains
taits of Wolfe' s oc iol og ical and psychol og ical fiction as
well, The e mb edd Wanin95 abOUt eCOn OmiC5, War, and
nuclea dest cti On remind us of Molfe's s oc iol Og ical n-
ns, Reality and fantasy weave in and out as they do in
the psycholical stOries, though e dercation is clearer
hee to both reade and chaactecs than it is in Wolfe's
more psychological fiction In the alternate world ''H''
pesupeoses, make-believe--the wa g -imics the world w
knm, While the econanic war which is e 93& ''reality'' o
the sto ry suggests our ax n conte vo a ry eality (the sto
was written in l973 and the hold Japanese cas have on e
market has not significantly changed since then), ough
'' is a g ane, an entectai nt, it ma kes seriou5 po int5
in a sophisticated way.
Mile ''H'' is concerned with enanics and warfare,
lfe's s Oc iol ical stories rra re fre qu ently warn us Of the
SubJugatiOn oE individuals by organizations (''many man-
Si Ons,'' in B), the i q lications of technol oy (''Te n
MO ved the Centau Pholus''(1)), and the danges which
theaten the world's ecological system, ''mr Million
re miles,''''m ticle Abo ut Hunting,'' and ''autyland''
(all in BD) ex.lore the consequences of destroying wildef
neSS
autyland'' is a shok and sordid tae that shms in
JUSt Eive pa ges what s of peo ple wh o care nothing or
e5efVation of wideness Molfe evokeS rather than
de5Ci5 a future with har5h clarity--an Am erica without
rkland, eve inch develod. me siolical wani of
aUtYland" is so fund ntal to the 5to that eve ele-
nt int5 to it. Mo g s o aTnbiguities dilute its in-
53

tehsity, ana its artistry is that of clarity, purpose and eociological thrust-I "Forlesen" makes its warning about the
Vivianees, The story, primarily a dialogue between two men, Suhjugation of the 1ndiv1dual within any organization by
describes a world in which the urge to destroy is much showing us a metaphorically universal situation, although
stron er than any urge to preserve. This world of land actually strange and fantastic. The story haunts the mind
de lg rs Oil Cqnpany magnates, entrepreneurS, defrauders, rather than Shakee a tlnger ln the face, and by its dream-
ve Opa { 1 ioides is presented as a direct extension of like atmosphere makes Wolfe‘s admonition seem more like
and potentä, älnerica of "Beauty1and" has become the way it premonition, evoking a feeling difficult to shove aside,
qurbgargdse 0; callous indifference and greed, but that isn't „ Such is the power of the psychological story, because it ex-
täe rial wallop of the story. Many have warned us of the plores the archetypal universality of a social situation.
dan rs of indifference and greed. For Wolfe, such sins are 'Gene Wolfe has chosen "Forlesen" to represent Labor
thegeivens of the story: he is more interested in the et— Day in his Book 'of Days because its protagonist is repre-
g f ld without wilderness upon the people who live sentative worker in a representative bureaucratic maze. His
"eciäs O ha wir is in its causes. Given a choice between position Symbolizes the way many people view their working
In it ithanl Et bit of wilderness and destroying it, Wolfe lives. Forlesen wakes up to find himself in peintieee
iägvrsg peoeplea so debased by their barren environments that employment as an executive in a plant. His duties are
· ‘ ' o destro couched in meaningless generalities ("assist in carrying out
they choose overwhelmingly and enthusiastically t y Corporate goalslu p, 106, (MSD), and ms time is Spent in
lt. Wolfe illustrates this horrible pSyChiO result of playing power games- What makes the story speculative fie-
l ' l ' res nsibility with a confession made by a rich tion with Gene Wolfe's stamp is that its metaphors are
eco Oglca lr po wh ie r The narrator chooses to carried to extremes and are described as actualities, an-
man~"O the "a“a°°r’n· Oe, ggäer the rich man of Jesus' manuel Forlesen‘s (surely an emblematic name) typical work
Call lthg réhch B22: ogvsulge The narrator'S use of a SYIn· day is his only work day, and it covers a bureaucrat's en-
endge (the confessional mode, the contrast between tire career from his entry in the morning as a junior execu—
Dives' angdished contrition (he gained his wealth by tive learning the ropes (and the sports cliches experienced
'talizin upon people's urge to destroy the last executives use) to his late—afternoon retirement party. The
Ciapl g h arrator's selfish in<]iffe1€€nC€ to stery compresses a tWentleth—Century corporate career into a
wlldellnessh and}; 9 E t ‘s lesson home: wilderness single day- In a life Spent at meaningless work that deals
mofa]-lty all dl-lve tlg Stäryecos stem in Qenetalitiee and in getting ahead rather than in actual
Serves the Soul as: wel ·aS 6 ceän is. to make a social production, in a life that divorces one from one's family
when wolf? S· primafäeggél land " he comes closest to and individual needs, one day does indeed fade into the next
Stétememil as li li ln onventions in a straightforward SO that one finds life over without ever having felt or done
uslng Sclence-flätlänltcre as an €COlOgl.Cal Wasteland (See anyt-hing FOrl€$9Ü'$ world, the WO[']_d of Kafka'5
männer: bete, t €¤ U ul Da Kate wilhe1m‘s Juniper büfeauerats, is filled with pointless regulations that fqrce
Chelsea Quinn Yarbfo S ) when his concern the individual, for mysterious and no doubt pointless mo-
le" John Brunner S e still expressee ÜVQS: into a pointless life. In this world Forlesen
turps lnward to the human mlhn rd seriäes have more of dream Wenders in Confusion, trying to catch on to the "game plan,“
Social concerm die yorldsthe 6 wolfe's psychological fic· ending his day, his life, without learning what possible
and less ef prebablllty tod er"' ften addresses the dig- purpose his life could have had. Taken literally, the
tion' mil Of mystery-and- lieamllo · CO ing with large Slt¤atiOn is surreal. Taken symbolically, it is mundane,
flcuitlias Of én lniilvldua ä-limentp society. This Forlesen gains some small success in his corporation,
Ox-garilzauons: ·b1g bilslnessr goveturns hack upon the in- Va9U€lY named "Model Pattern Products," because he doesnt
p‘?rFlCUlar Soclologlcal Cogiemn WO]_fe‘s psychological quite fit in- He is capable of original thought, evidenced
divlqual and appears repéates Äh las “House of Ancestors"(2) bY the way he analyzes a "Sample Leadership Problem,"
flctlom from early Stgrges hu h "The Island of D0CtOF Rather than taking the problem at face value, he tries to
and "The EICRARS ef _wa‘( ) t rollgwork The Book Of the New learn more information about it to solve it wisely instead
äiäthu trllogy to hl-S Imst recen I Ofknßrllely cgrrectly, with the result that angther exectltjve
-—-° „  ative dream—like, and myS' es S lm fOr advice- Forlesen's glimmer of creativity, of
teriousF(:i·:>l,(iaä(lra, (i;,"B§)ps;;h§;§gSical dtory with juet such a n°“'CO“fO¤niSt behavior, also makes him visit his family at
54 55
_ _
tensity, and its artist is at o clarity, e a
vividness, me sto, pirily a dialogue ten t n,
descibe6 a wo0rld in which the urge tO destOY is much
stronger th8n an ur tO preserve This mcld of land
l, oil ny nagnates, entepreneus, defraudes,
and potential suicides is presented as a dinct exteMion of
r , me rica Of ''autyla^ h the way it
is ause of callous indiference a greed, but that ien't
the al all of the story, ny have wamed us of the
dangen of indi{{een a greed Fo lfe, such sins ae
the giveM oE the stO; he is Iare inteested in the et-
Eects oE a rld witht wilderness upon the ople o live
in it than he is in its causes, Given a oice beten
saving the last bit of wilderness ard destiq it, lfe
shms people so debased by their baren environnents that
they ch oventhelmingly and enthusiastically to destroy
it
olfe illustrates this horrible psychic cesult of
elil irespoMibility with a confessi On made by a rich
nan to the narator, o is r, me narator ches to
Cal the ri man DiVeS, aftec the iCh man Of JeSUs'
parle in the of Wke me naator ' s use of a sym-
bOlic name, the confessional mode, the contast tween
Dives ' anguished contit ion (he gained his wealth by
capitalizing upon people's uc tO desty the last
wildess), and the narc3tor's selfish indifference tO
moality al3 drive the story's lessm home wilderness
senres the soul as ll as the eystem
When Molfe's prima concern is to make a s Ocial
statement, as it is in ''Beautyland,'' he s clOsest tO
using science-{iction conventions in a stcaightfOard
manner: here, the futue as an elogical wasteland (
melsea im Yacbro's False Dawn, Kate Wilhelm's ' e
T' , ohn nner's me Shee0 k 0) Me hS COnCefn
turns inward to e hn 'nd, though he still expresses
ial acen, e rlds he descris have rae Of dre
and less oE prility to th4n, Wolfe's psychOlical fic-
tion, full of yste and deam, often adesses the dif-
ficulties of an individual in coping wi lage
oanitioM: big business, govenment, eOciety ThiS
paticula sociolical conce turM back upOn e in-
dividual and apars repeatedly in olfe's psychOlOgical
fictim, fc ealy stocies such as ''House OE cestOn''(2)
a   me  S of Ma(3) though ''The Island of DoctO
a'' til to his st recent work, m_e k Of e W
Sun ,
Foflesen" (), an evative, dream-like, and my5-
teris velìa, is a psychological stOry with Jiust su a
54

t
5i OliCal th5t ''FOfleSen'' make5 itS Wanin9 abO Ut the
subjugation Of the individual within an Organizati On by
howing us a metahOriCally univesal situati On, althgh
actually stange and antastic, m e sto haunts the mi nd
rathe than ShakeS a fl eC in M e face, and by it5 dce -
ike a sphere makes OlEe's admonition seem mOfe like
remonition, evOking a feeling difficult to shOve aside.
such is the pm e Of the psychOl og ical sto , be cause it ex-
loes the archety Pa l univesality of a soc ial situati On.
Ge ne Wolfe has chOsen ''FOrlesen'' to epresent abor
y in his BO Ok o Da be cause its protagonist is epe-
5entetive worer in a cepresentative bu reaucatic ma 2e. His
ition s lizes the way ma ny ople view thei rking
lives. Forlesen wakes up tO find himselt in pointless
employment a5 an eXeCUtlVe ln a lant, His dutleS are
couch ed in aningless genealities (''assist in car ing out
rate goals,'' p, lU6, B), and his ti is snt in
playing er g anR s. M at Tna Xes the sto s pe culative fic-
tion with Gene Molfe's stamp is that its metaphOs ae
cacried tO extremes and are descri d as actualities -
nuel Folesen's (surely an e mb eTna tic n ) typical wo rk
day is his o l work day, and it co vers a bureaucrat's en-
tie caree fr an his ent in the nD cning as a junior execu-
tive learning the rOpes (and the sports cliches expeienced
executives use) to his late-aften n retie nt pa ty The
story c esses a twentieth-centucy cpo ate car into a
single day. In a life spent at rTeaningless work that deals
in genealities and in getting ahead ather than in actual
pr0duction, in a life that divorces one Erom one's family
and individual needs, One day d s indeed fade intO the next
sO that one finds life over with t eve having felt or do
anything. olesen's wold, like the wocld of Kafka's
eaucat5, is filled with intless regulations at foce
the individual, or mystei Ous and no doubt ointless mo -
tives, intO a pointless life. Tn this wold Folesen
Wandecs in conusion, ting to catch on to the ''g æ plan,''
endi his day, his life, without learning what possible
PUPOse his life could have had. Taken literally, the
SituatiOn is sureal. T aX en s 3ically, it is mundane
FOrlesen gains s s ll suc ce ss in his 0 qo ration,
Va9Uely nand "m od el Pattern r od ucts," be cau5e he d oe snt
lte it in. He is ca pa ble of oiginal thought, evidenced
bY the way he analyzes a |ls am ple eadeship oblem,|'
ther than taking the problem at ace value, he trie5 to
learn e ino tion a t it to lve it wisely intead
Of rely cofrectly, with the re5ult that ano th er exe cu tive
aSkS him for advice. Forlesenl5 gli r of ceativity, of
nOnonfoi5t havior, al5o es him visit his fily at
55

again as men in their grandsons' time .... (p.
lunch—-a small effort at family life-T-and makes him examine 90, GNBD)
the road on his way to work, attemptlng to lear? Somethävg . . .
about his environment. Such ereetwlty deeen t Save %‘“ perhapsforlesen is caught in the tortures Ofhhell, gr 15
fz-an a pointless career and öl; lgslgntlflcargi €§g'wOl;_lä‘é conälnäähg E5 lgfte, or ä repiatlng llt, gi 1S thrniigtvbei-
· ‘ ' de th 0 c arac er. _ wi er in 0 e u ure. r per aps no . e soclo ogica
?;‘;;]?eSt;:ln:"aar$(?i§)tei';1;pS Fn C0ntemPOYeFY Cerperate life' this warning is clear-—the dehumanization by corporate life——hut
ie al], one can aSk _ the.H\9taPhOf that Cäffléa the warning is ambiguous, and the
Che Cannot, lt seems, ask fer a¤Y eertem e“S"’€‘S ambiguity makes the_warn1ng more powerful. "E‘orlesen" makes
Forlesen finds none: its tsociologicäl ptginttä, gsdwell as 1ts psychological ones,
b s owlng us e ru o reams.
"Everyone's entitled to an Explainer—-in ny To illustratelcorporate life with a Book of the Dead
whatever form he chooses-·-at the end of his is an unexpected twist. Wolfe makes frequent use of a diff
Life. He . . . may be a novelist, aged ferent sortlof twist. He wrenches our expectations of
loremaster, National Hero, warlock, or actor. . science fiction and fantasy conventions. n The title "The
_ _ ot a theologian, philO5OPherr Priest' Or Hero aS Werwolf" (TIOD) indicates one such inversion; here,
doctor." _ N of the tfadltj-Ol'1al role of the Werewolf in fantasy, The
¤l want to know if it'S meaht a“Yl?hlÜg: werewolf is the protagonist, rather than the antagonist, but
Forlesen said. "If what I suffered——1f it S that is Only the first; twist. Wolfe posits a future in
been worth it“ _ N which Earth has been taken Over by an alien race that trans-
··NO,·· the little man Seld· YeS· NO' forms most human beings into its own alien physiology.
yeS_ yes, No. Yes. Yes- MaYhe·" (P· 12a' Those human beings who remain human find all their food sup-
GNBD) älies usuxpled äylähe alien maäters. To sur;;llve,ht}€]e hämpgn
1HQS sta , 1 , an eat t eir masters, oug e i ·-
'Ihe reader finds no answers, either. Forlesen cannot under- ferences petween the two Sentient $p€Ci€S seem Slighb The
Stand fully the eituation in whiCh he finds hl“Self'tQO€ fi: human beings, rather than the aliens, are the rmnsters in
we_ In the Second paragraph of the StOrY¤ we learn a their_pract1ce of a form of cannibalism, _and the reader is
the time he woke he knew Oh]-äuhlis ggg n‘äL;é)th€Tä?;tw;?IrtE lh th? Stfangfi pOSlt1<€n of empathlzlng wlth the prac-
is therefore suspec p- , · 1 ioners 0 a mons rous ac .
ägtetrhaindthe remalndef of the $tOKYr color-ed bY "Thlfee Flngere" (TIOD) begin; with a .5urpri5j_ng Vlew
pereeptions, shows thOSe Peteeptlqns much more reha y1la,S df Wa1t_Disney Studios as an evil Mickey Mafia and endenwith
it Shgys any information abOUt hle ‘^'OYld _The_ nova the an Unvelllng Seene Which further confounds our expectations.
concet-ns are psychologiealr ahd lts Perspectlve 15 Upon M!-Chael ldentlfles the, three Disney characterslwho are
interior lif€_ k nt to threatening him according to the archetypes which they
A few pages later Ferlesen reads ärom Ö bw hrlea like l '~'eP!'9$ent= Captain Hook is all the menacing sea captains
wtell you how to be gOOd« and hw te llV€""€V€¤ét lies § end P1!-‘ateS of legend and history, The Big Bad Wolf repre—
thatn (p_ 89, (M35), The excenrpt Forlesen rse S fäm Of l sents all the savage wolves of European legend., and the
that the Stfangé world lr]tO whlch he awakes 1*5 SOITB Othat Qjéeyj] the Hgnaclng waren Of power; thls 15 the
afteflife_ But the excetpt offers s0 mähY ehelces i first unveiling. But the threesome peels away another
neither he nor we are much wiser. layer: they transform themselves into three paunchy
businesspeople who literally smother Michael (Mickey) in a
Of the nature of death and the Dead we may surfeit of sweetness by stuffing his nose and mouth with
enumerate twelve kinds. First there are those bonbons. Perhaps this is what Wolfe fears has happened to
who become new gods, for whom new universes are all the powerful archetypes of fairy tales. 'Ihey have been
born .... Fifth those who dwell in gardens of transformed into sticky—sweet business Ventures but, he
bliss, or are tortured. Sixth those who con- wams, such attempts to strip legends of their strength can
tinue as in life .... Eighth those who find in ¤¤lY.prov0ke destruction. Hardly the lesson we customarily
their graves their mother‘s véemhtä iäisénbgii reeelve frqn our childhood friend, Mickey Mouse, and his
life circle forever .... en
· 57
56
_ tt
lunch--a sll effort at family life--and nakes him exine
the rOad on his way tO rk atteqting tO lea saTeing
abOut his enviorunent Such creativity doesn't save h'
fan a lntleSS carf and an lnS9nflCant end, bUt it
gives him a certain depth of character In the wOrld of
FOrleSent and pemaS in COntera COfate life thiS
is all o Gan ask.
canOt, lt SmS, aSk fOr anY Certaln anSWefS.
FOrle5en finds none:
''Everyone's entit3ed tO an Explaine--in
whatever Eo he chooses-*at the end OE his
ife He , . may be a nove1ist, aged
lOremaSter, Yati Onal HeO, Walk, Or aCt Or
. Or a theologian, phil Osopher, priest, or
dtor , '
''I want to knm if it's neant anything,''
oresen said. ''IE what T sufTered--if it's
been rth it''
O,'' the little man Sad llYeS. O
Ye5 eS. YO YeS YeS may.'' ( l28t
,,)
me reader finds n0 answers, either Folesen cannot under-
stand fully the sitution in hich he finds hin6elf, nor n
we In the secOnd paagraph of the story, we lean at ''at
the tine he woke he knew only his am nane; the est cane
later and 5 thereOre 5USCt'' ( 85 ) miS WanS
US that the remainder Of the StO, COlOred bY FOrleSentS
perptions, shms e pecepti Ons rm3ch rare reliably than
it shs an inforTnation about his world The novella 's
rM ae psyChOli, and t pe5peCtlVe iS UpOn the
inteio life
A few pages late Forlesen feads f a k neant tO
''tell y h to be , and hax tO live-vething like
that'' (p 89, 03) me excerpt Forlesen reads implies
that the strange world into wich he awakes is fo Of
afterlie t the excerpt ofEers sO many choices that
neither he nor w are ch wiser.
Of the nature of death and the ad we may
enrate twelve kinds. First thee are thOse
o caTe new gods, or wh new universes are
bon . Fifth those who dwell in gardens of
bli5S, O ae tOrtUred SXth OSe whO n'
tinue as in li{e Eighth those who find in
their graves thei mother's wombs and in one
life circle orever . . Tenth thOse bOrn
56

agan as nen n thi grandsoans' ti.... (p.
90, )
rps Forlesen is caught in the tortures of hell, Or is
atinuin9 aS in llfe, O iS reatin9 it, O lS thU5t
wildeed intO the future Or pehaps nOt. me sociOlogical
arning is clear--the dehwnanization by cOate lje-mbut
the taphor that cacries the warning is iguous, and the
iity makes the warning nDre pmeul. ''Forlesen'' matce5
its iologcal pointS, a5 Well as it p5YchOlical OneS,
by shing us the tru Of dean6
To illustrate coate life with a k of the ad
i5 an uneqected twist MOlfe m3ke5 fequent use of a dif
ferent sort of twist He wenches our expectations Ot-
science fiction and fantasy conventions. The title ''The
HerO aS rwolf" (TIO) idiCate5 One SUCh inVer5i Oni here,
of the traditional role of the relf in Eantasy me
rewolf S the rOtagOni Stl athe than the anta90niSt, bUt
that is only the first twist, Wol Ee posits a Euture in
ich Eath has been taken over by an alien ace that traM-
fo most human beings into its own alien physiol Ogy.
mose hn beiqs o remain hn find all their sup-
plies usu by the alien n3astes. To survive, the hn
beiS stalk kill, and eat their 5teS thOu9h the dif'
feences between the two sentient species seem slight me
hwnan bein951 rather than the allenS, ae the nDnSte ln
thei practice of a fonn of cannibalism, and the reader is
left in the strange position of thizing with e prac-
tition oE a nDnstrs act,
''mree Fiqers'' (TIOD) ins with a surprising view
Of Malt Disney Studios as an evil Mickey mafia and ends with
an unveiling sce ich urther nfounds our expectations.
ichael identifies the three Disne chaacers whO are
threatening him according to the achetypes which they
epesent Captain Hk is all e nacing sea captains
and pirates of lend and histo, me Big Bad Molf repre-
SentS all the savage wOlves Of EurOpean legendI and e
Micked 0ueen all the nenacing wn of er; this is the
first unveiling. But the threesone peels away another
layer they transform themselve5 into three paunchy
bUsissle who literally sthe michael (mickey) in a
SUfeit of sweetness by stufing his nose and nauth with
rhaps this is what Wole fears has haned to
ll e rful archets of fai tales. mey have been
tansfOed into sticky-sweet business ventues but, he
a such attts to strip lends of their strerq n
ly pOvoke destruction. t3ardly the lesson we custanaily
ive f r ildhood friend, ickey mouse, and his
57

colleagues.
"Alien Stones" (TIOD) practices a few turns of conven—- Patents ars dead (°°Ths Changeling"), indifferent (“The IS_
tional expectations of those stock science-fiction charac— land Of Dectet Death and Othsf Stgriee"), or absent ("The
ters, the capable and phlegmatic space ship captain and the Ei/stiash Mitsslse"); in some way his parents have failed es
eager young apprentice. When we see those characters we ex- PtOts¢tOi”s· He is often an only child ("The Island of Doc-
pect the former to teach us how the milieu of the story tot Death and Other Steriee," Peace, "The War Beneath the
operates and the latter to keep us company in learning about Tree"), but sometimes merely separated from his siblin s
it. We do not expect that the two may be the same person or ("Ths EYstlaSh Miracles"). He may be psychologieaii dig-
that one of them exists only as a computer construct. Our tntbed ("The Chahgslihg," "The Death of Doctor Islandt) o
expectations are upset further when the captain and his ap- Ph)/'sisaiiy hshÖiCaDped ("The Eyeflash Miracles"). Whatevei
prentice serve to make us question the story‘s reality hle Special difficulties, he is a child, and therefore
rather than to present its reality to us. Such questions Dwsflsee, unable to understand completely the adult world
are especially surprising because the Captain does much that around nm' As ah Ofphah, an only child, a dietnrhed er
is quite expected: he falls in love with a beautiful pas- hfghsh One, he is isolated in some way from family nor-
senger, induces the story‘s mystery by logical reasoning, mäl1tY,_a¤d SOCiety. The isolation can signal and Icause
and shows physical prowess and bravery. great Clletrees, as it does in "The Changeling," or turn the
Next to the observation that Gene Wolfe‘s work is lsolato Into a Vistimr as happens in "The Island of Doctor
underrated——an observation in the process of becoming Dsath°° ti’iiOgY, er bring about ecstasy and transformation
obsolete——reviewers most often remark upon his use of as Ocents in “Ths El/stlaeh Miracles." I
children. The mtif of the isolated child occurs again and · _ In "Tne Chahgsiihg" (GWBD), a man eonvieted Of U-easdn
again, early ("The Changeling," l968, reprinted ih GWBD), ddtihg ths_ Korean conflict returns to his home town and
middle (Peace, l975), and recent (The Shadow of the Tor- retreats into childhood memories. Memoir is an important
turer, 1980). An only child himself who has watched his own dsViCs ih W0lfe'S work, used more elaborately in Fifth Head
four children grow up, Wolfe has thought a great deal about PsaCe, and The Book of the New Sun.
childhood. 'Ihe children he writes about are not the secure, met' the stgtl/°s harr nyetery and a
fundamentally happy children often found in children‘s dteam'_ His hgmstgwh h<3s¤°t Changed, children still play as
literature. His children remind us that childhood was far EheY did whsh he was little, and as a childhood buddy sa s
from carefree: the characters of Wolfe‘s stories are iso- NOb°dY_ isaVss CsssOhVills" (D- 142, GNBD). (The localeyof
lated, perhaps from family, perhaps from other children; EE is CassOhViiis shti the stOrY previews the novel in
they are outsiders to the adult world that towers over them; ( Vatishs Wa}/S) Peter Palmer discovers two strange thin S
they are anxious, confused, and powerless to control a world UDOH his return. First, there is no record gf hie hai,-ig
bent upon disillusioning them. Though the children of ever lived there: his father and mother are dead his ic?
Wolfe‘s fiction are not portrayed as typical or average, in- tnte _is missihg ih SChO0l photos, and whatever record;) of
stead are insane, orphaned, damaged, brilliant, or wealthy, nls lite might haVs existed ih ths l0<>al hswspaper have been
all readers who remember their childhoods remember their own bntht· SsCO¤d, a little boy he remembere playing with as a
feelings of isolation and anxiety as well as their frolick— child: a boy Who was only four years old when peter mved
ing and camaraderie. Wolfe concentrates upon those darker from ¢¤SS¤¤v1ll@ at about sight or hihs, has hw grovm to be
memories when he employs the motif of the isolated child. no Tote thah sight sf hihe Years old himself. That little
How corrmonly does the isolated child occur in Wolfe‘s bel? s hölhs is Peter Palmieri. Peter Palmer and Peter Pal-
fiction? Here is a chronological list of his appearances: mletl exist simültaheeuely in the present of the story and
"Mountains Like Mice," "The Changeling," "Paul's Treehouse," ggs other Pstsgh, Peter Palmieri'S adcpted father, knws the
"The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories," Fifth Head thy has _nOt agsd sssgttiihg te the laws of real time, within
er cerbeme, ··A11en ste¤ee,·· ··1‘ne Death er Doctor 1e1end,” Re limits Of the Steh/'S reliability, then-—end it is nar-
"Dark of the June," "The Hero as Werwolf," Peace, "Straw," th ed bi? Palmet“"sti-'ahgs thihgs aetually occur and reänd us
The Devil in a Forest, “The Eyeflash Miracles," "Three at this is s Wgfk of Speculative fiction.
Fingers," "The War Beneath the Tree," "The Adopted Father,“ _ hgwever, Pa]1ner's life gives ample reason for his nar-
and The Shadow of the Torturer. Almost always, the child is teilen tg be Uhreliable. His childhood was isolated: his
a boy-—"The Dark of the June" is the only exception. His E her dled whsh he Wae eight or nine, and he and his father
ved from Cassonville at that time, so ne neee memory to
58
59
I
___ _ __
colleagues.
l' ' tl D '
tional expectations of thOse stOc science-{iction charac-
terS, the Ca pa ble and phle tlC 5aCe 5hl Catain and the
eager y ou ng apprentice en we see th os e characte rs m ex-
pect the ormer to teach us h Ow the milieu of the sto
o pe ates and the latter tO keep us canp any in leaning a bo ut
it. Me do not expect that the twO y be the s anB person o
that one oE th em exists Only as a c uter const ru ct Ou r
expectations are upset further when the catain and his ap-
prentice serve to make us question the story's reality
ra th e than to present its ealit to us Such qu estions
are especial3y surising because Me Captain ds ch that
is quite ex pe ct ed: he falls in love with a be autiful pa s-
senger, induces the story's ystery by lical reasoning,
a nd sh ms physical p me ss and brave .
Mext to the observati On that Gene Molfe's wOk is
underated--an obsevati On in the process oE becoming
obsolete--eviewers m0st often remark upon his use of
children m e nD ti of the isolated ch ild oc curs again and
49ain, earlY (''me Chan9elin9,'' l968, eQrinted in GMD),
middle (PeaCe, l975) and reCent (me Shad Of the TOr'
turer, l980), m only child hielf who has watched his am
fOUr Children 9 a3 Upl WOlfe haS 9ht a 9eat deal a t
childh . e children he writes a bo ut are not the se cu re,
undamentally happy children 0ften found in children's
liteature His children remi nd us that chil dh was far
fr refree: the aacters of Molfe's stories ae isO-
lated, perhap5 r family, erh4p6 ran Othe Childfeni
th ey are tsiders to the dult world that t m ers over th em
they are anXiOUS COnfU5ed, and pm erleSS tO ntr0l a rld
bent u po n d'sillusioning them, ThOugh the children Of
lfelS fiCti On are t rtay ed aS t iCal Or aVea9e, ln
Stead ae inSane Ohaned, d ama 9ed, brlliant, O alYl
all readers wh o r mbe r th eir chil s re ne their mn
feelin3s of isolation and anxiety as we ll as th eir frOlick-
i and c raderie Molfe co ncentrates u po n th os e darXer
ries en he e loys e ra tif of th e isOlated child
H m c nly d s the isolat ed child oc cur in lfe's
fiction? ere is a chronol og ical list of his ap pe aran D s
MntanS ike miCe,'''e Cha lin9''''PaUl'S TeehSe'
''me Island of tor ath and Other Stories,'' _Fifth Head
O Cerbe ru5, "Alien StOneS,'' "me ath Of t Or ISland,
k Of the Une,'l ''me HerO a5 nxOlf,'' PeaCe, l'StfaWl'
The De vil in a Forest, 'The Eyeflash Miracles,'' ''Three
Flngen,'' ''me War neath e Tree,''''e AdOpted Father,'
and me Shad o the Tortuer AJ nast always, the child is
a y-''me r o the June'' is the ly exceptjon His
58

__l _ __ _
rents are dead (''The Changeling''), indiferent (''The s-
and of ct Or ath and Other Stoies''), Oc aent (''me
eflash mir3cles''); in s way his paents have 'ailed as
protectors. He i5 Often an only child (''me Island Of -
to De ath and Other Stoies,'' eace, '''he War Beneath the
Tree''), hut s tis merely sepacated r his siblings
("me Eyelash miracles'') He y be psychologically dis-
tur bed (''The Chan9elin9'' ''me ath Of tOr TSland''), O
ysically handi Ga ped (''The Eyeflash miracle5''), M atever
hiS SeCial diffiCUltie5, he i5 a Child, and thefetOe
erless, unable tO undestand c letely the adult wOrld
arOUnd him, an Orphan, an OnlY Child, a diStUrb O
broken one, he is isolated in s way ran family, nor-
lity, and society, me isolation can signal and cause
great disteSS, as t d S in ''The Changelingl'' Or tUrn the
i5olatO intO a ViCtim, a5 hapens in ''me ISland Of tOf
ath'' trll 0F, O brin9 aboUt eC5ta5Y and tranSfO rma tl On,
as cus in ''me Eye.lash miracles''
In ''me Chaeling'' (B), a n nvicted Of treasOn
during the Korean conflict returns to his hO tOwn and
reteats into childh ood ne ie, meir is an i ant
device in lfe's work, u5ed ra e ela cately in Fif M ad
of Cerbe rus, Peace, and me k of the Yew Sun Peter Pal-
merl the StOy nafatOr, COTTeS haTR tO a myStery and a
e am , His h t n h as n't changed, chîldren still .lay as
they did When he Wa5 little, and aS a Chil dh bUddy SaYSI
Mo leaves Ca s so nville'' (p l42, U3 BD), ( m e lOcale of
Peace is Cas5onville and the sto previms the nOvel in
varis ways) Pete Palr iscovers two strange things
u pO n his return First, there is no re rd of his havi ng
ever lived there his fathe and ther ae dead, his pic-
ture is missing in schl photos, and atever ecords Of
his life mi ght have exist ed in the l oc al newspa pe r have be en
rnt. Second, a little bo y he re s playing with as a
child, a bo y o was only four years old when Peter ra ved
fr Cassonville at abouteight ornine,has n gam tO be
than eight o nine yeas old hielf, mat little
Y's n anR is Peter Ralmieri. Peter Palner and ter Pal-
eri exist siltan sly in the present of the 5tOry, and
One Othe r50n, Pete Palmieri'S adopt ed fathr, kn the
& has not aged according to the laws of real tinR, Mithin
the limits of the sto ry 's eljaility, th en--and it is na r-
rat by Ral --strange thi s actually oc cu and remind us
that this is a wo rk oE s lative fiction.
H ax ever, Palmer's life gives le reason for his nar-
aton tO uneliable, His childh vas isolat ed: his
er died when he was eight or nine, and he and his father
V fan Cassonville at that tine, so he uses ne tO
59


eeeape into the time when he still had his mother, when he here named Ransom, Ot C·S· Lewis's Out of the Silent planet
felt that he had a hometovm. Peter Palmieri, his alter ego, 'I‘he ¤O‘/Olla OOmbi¤@S exeerpts from ,:,
never qrowe beyond the age at which Palmer lost his mother. narfatiO¤ in thO SQOODÖ pefeen, "you" referring to Tagkia as
Furthermore, Palmer's childhood was disturbing, as the fol- ” a representative child. Characters from the story Tackie is
lowing recollection shows: reading appear in the narration, as the child calls them u
_ _ to keep him company. The strong and heroic Captain Ransomp
We had watched the little green animal hop back the evil and powerful Doctor Death, and the faithful d -ma,
toward the water, and then, when it was only one Bruno all become his companions. The first two haveg ln
jump away frau dear safety, I had lashed out and eounterparts in Tackie's mundane life: Captain Ransorsaie
suddenly, swiftly, driven the broad blade of my the dashing but irresponsible Jason, the m0ther's bo frie E
scout knife through him and pinned him to the and supplier of drugs, and Doctor Death is Doctor Blaäk th}
mud. (p. 143, GNBD) mother‘s respectable and drab suitor, who saves her frtom 6
drug overdose but may also have supplied her with dru sa
This impulsive, gratuitous, and irresponsible violence indi— Unfortunately for Tackie, there is no counterpart in his g
cates an uneasy childhood, at the very least. Such a terior life for the faithful companion exce t for te?
childhood, violent and lonely, might well have contributed b0OkS“a¤Ö hie memories: I P 15
to the adult's action of rejecting his native country to
stay behind in Korea. The reverse of this logic is also Doctor Death smiles. "But if you start
true. Palmer's adult isolation, beginning with his father‘s the book again we’ll all be back. Even Golo and
death ("he was the last family I had, and things changed for the b¤ll—man."
me then," p. 140, GWBD), compounding in a Korean prison canp "Honest:»··
and later a U.S. military prison, might drive him back to a "Certainly." He stands up and tousles
childhood which, however sad, would nevertheless be sur- your hair. "It's the same with you Tackie
rounded by the idyllic haze of recollection. In the Casson— YO“°F@ tw YOUNG to realize it yet, hntllya the
ville to which he returns, Palmer finds an eternal mother, Same with you." (p. 17, ·l‘loD)
Peter Palmieri's, whose child remains eternally a child. _
For Palmer, an escape into childhood would mean an escape Tackie. can relive his fantasies, in which vivid re
into a time when he was not responsible for moral decisions eentatlons Of QOOÖ (Ransom) and evil (Death) take n t· pre-
Peter Palmer and Peter Palmieri are the same person, Peter h1.m, and he can also recreate the events of his cäiläogä
Pan refusing to grow up because of the threat of adult ter- y later when he will have gained enough sophistication t
rors and responsibilities. I derstand the good, evil, and moral ambiguity of the ag lt-
In the "Island of Doctor Death" trilogy of novellas who shaped his childhood through their indifference U S
(TIQD)--which inclgdgs ·Tne Island gf Xctgr Death and other _ The adult Tackman Babcock will recall his l l
5to;~iee,“ “The Death of Doctor Island," and "The Doctor of ehlldn°°d t!'Om ä safe distance, rememhering not was I woréehy
Death Island“——wolfe shows a young child, an adolescent, and he puenes UP mY mOther's sleeve" hut the nßre romt ·· a C '
an adult, each isolated, each a victim, whose isolations are weten' he PUSVIGS Up her sleeve so that all tne Othe eS·yOu
reflected by an island of some kind. Though the Chféö tlon merke ShOw" (P- 15, TIOD). He wj_]_]_ kngw the dääfénjec-
pt-otagoniete are quite different people, living at different between the fealities and the fantaeiee of nie yyldhooäence
times and in different versions of the future, they also bs able to say; C 1 and
show how the isolated child grows up.
"The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories" con- You run downstairs looking for Ransom but he is
cerns a little boy who lives with his mother in a big house gone and there is nobody at the partylat all ex-
on an isthmus of land called Settlers Island. Tackman cept the real people and, in the cold shadows of
Babcock‘s mother is a drug addict who makes few allowances the back stoop, Doctor Death's assistant Gol
for "Tackie" in her life, so the lonely boy escapes into (P- 15, TIOD) O'
fiction, specifically into a lurid paperback called The Is-
1 . . . ———·· But he will ~
and of Doctor Death, which 1S a pulp transformation of H.G hi also know that it was the fantasies that ave
welle S The Island of Doctor Moreau with just a hint, in a m the most OOmPa¤i0¤Ship and the most intenae Vitalgty
I
60 6l
_
eSCaPe intO the tine When he Still had hiS nDther, en he
felt that he had a htam te Paieri, his alte ego,
rRver qraxs beyord the age at Which Palne lost his rathe.
urthenare, Palc's childh was disturbing, as the fo3
lmiq rel3ection shaFs
We had watched the little green animal hop back
tad the water, and then, when it was only one
j away fran dear sat-ety , I had lashed out a
suddenly, swiftly, diven the braad blade of
scout knife through him and pinned him to the
d (p lQ3, BD)
mis ' ulsive, gratuitous, and iresponsible violence ii-
cates an uneasy childhood, at the ve least. Su a
childho0d, violent and lonely, might ll have contribut
to th3 adult's actim of rejecting his native countTy to
stay behind in Korea. The revene Of this lic is also
true Par's adult iso3ation, beginning ith his father's
death ''he was the last fanily I had, and things changed for
ne then,'' p. l40, 03BD), cnding in a Koean prison c
and later a U.S. milita prison, might dive him back to a
childhood which, however sad, would nevertheless be sur-
ra1nded by the idyllic haze of ecollection. In the Casson-
ville to which he returns, Palr finds an eternal rather,
Pete Palmiei's, whose child remains eternally a child.
For Rar, an esca into ildhOOd would mean an esca
into a t' when he was t espOnsible for ral decisions,
Pete Palrrer and Peter Paieri ae the s peon, Peter
Ran refusiq to grm up because o the threat of adult ter-
on and respoMibilities.
In the ''Island of ctor ath'' trilo9y of novellas
(TIOD)ich includes ''me Island Of tor a and 0ther
Stories,'' ''me ath of tor Island,'' and ''me tor of
ath sland''lfe sha3s a young child, an adolesnnt, and
an adult, each isolated, each a victim, whose isolations are
reflected by an island of soTTe kind, Thou9h the three
pr OtagOnists ae 0ite difeent peOple, livirq at diffennt
tines and in different vesions of the future, they alsO
sh hm the isolated child gras up.
''The Island of cto ath and Othe Stories'' n-
ms a little bay wo lives with his nDther in a big haI
On an isthmus of land called Settlers Island. Tackman
Bahock's ther is a dcug addict o nakes fm allans
f Or ''Tackie'' in her life, so the lorRly boy escapes intO
fiction, specifilly into a lurid papeick called me Ts-
land of tor ath, wich is a pulp transotim of H.G
ls s _Te Island of tor reau with just a hint , in a
6O

t _
Ransan, o CS wis's Out of the Silent Planet
e vella ineS eXCertS fan TaCkie '5 readin9 With
fration in the 5eCOnd SOn, ''yOu'' reecrin9 tO Tackie aS
repfesentative chld Chaactecs fan the stO Tackie is
adi apar in the naatiOn as te child calls them up
to kp him canpany me strOng and heroic Captain Ransan
e evil and erful tO ath, and the fai{ul n
no all C hl5 Can OnS me fifSt twO have Pale
nterts in Tackie's mundane life: Captain Rans Om in
e dashiq but ireSpOMible ason, the rather's bOyfriend
sulier Of drugs, and tOr ath is tOr Black , the
er's esctable and drab suitor, whO saves her f a
drug overdOse but maY alsO have supplied her with dgs
unfortutely f Or Tackie, there is no counteart in is ex-
terior life Oc the Eaithful c Ompani On, excet fOr his
s--and his neries
Doctor Death smiles. ''t if yaJ stat
the bOOk again ' ll all back. Even Golo and
e bulln''
Honest ? ''
''Cetainly'' He stands up and tousles
your hair. ''t's the sa with y, Tackie
're t young tO reali2e it yet, but it's the
s ith you'' (p, l7, T30D)
Tackie can relive hi5 fantasies, in which vivid repre-
sentatiOns of goOd (Ran) and evil (Death) te notin Of
h, and he can also recreate e events o his childh
later en he will have gained enough sophistication tO un-
rstand the good, evil, and ral ambiguity oE e adults
O sha his childh through their indifferen
The adult Tackman Babcock will recall his lOnely
il f a safe distance, rembering not ''as I watch,
h0 shes up ny ther's sleeve'' t the Tare rte ''as y
Match, he ushes up her sleeve that all the other injec-
ti On rks sh0w'' (p. l5, TIOD). He will knax the diferen
tn the realities and the fantasies of his childh and
le to say ;
run damstairs lking or Rans, but he is
ne and there is y at the pay at all ex-
pt the real pele and, in the ld shadows of
the back stoop, tor ath's assistant lo,
(p l5, TIOD)
&t he will also kn that it as the fantases that gave
h the most companionsip ,nd the ra5t inienee vitalit
6l

not his mother who lived in her own dream world of drugs and herore he was old enough te remember her hi f h _
in a place called "The House of 31 Februafy." And we know religion and memories), the isolation O} is ét er lost In
that the narrator of this story is the adult Babcock the isolation Of cryogenic freezinq Booksmgiäisämient, and
recreating his puzzling childhood so that he can deal with a child, because he snrrounded himself with tz; h Vard es
it. I _ gf Dickens; books put him in prison, because he lgilafaätäß
But if Tackie had possessed a psyche more frail or a business partner to keep Control Over his im/_€ t, 6 ls
family more damaging, what sort of adolescent might he have ing books; and books released him from prisonn aon, Speak.,
become? Perhaps he would have been as disturbed as Nicholas knowledgeable sabotage gf the inventien ave h'. biausé es
Kenneth de Vore, the protagonist of "The Death of Doctor Is- power. Throughout his cryogenically exgended lin. E rgammQ
land." In this second in the trilogy of novellas, which retains his sanity and his ability to mani lat 11;, Alvard
received the 1973 Nebula Award, Nicholas is the fourteen- is, then, someone who has not been brokälh be 9 its', He
year-old son of a woman who lives in another sort of dream theugh he is not an exemplary figure either.)! riso atéion;
world: his partner, and he booby—trapped his inventioh soetrhää (tägig
His mother had never been below the orbit of äagänihätägrtäugldagäläi tiäp?e;ämth;äO3n£;ce(Speaking books
Mars; büt She Pre?-ended to have ePe¤t her begin to deteriorate without his int SSa?y), lt would
girlhood on Earth; each reference to the lie Franklin, he, Therefore the no eäilely-'lOn' Ben
filled Nicholas with inexpressible fufy and glorious: one may survive isolation bu]: ta S hope ls not
shame. (p. 108; TIOD) äacks real empathy for anyone, includiäg :i;0itg‘;€I-Alvääg
im; 0 le are n '
Life and psyche have brought Nicholas to sucéh a pass that he charagäegs in his Zelfsväd rääzgléenäerhaps less real, than the
has spent a large portion of his short li e in mental in- In the first tw ° . .
stitutions. Because of his violence and visions, doctors pathize with the logerizveäéääegintiteäii Ser;GSÖT:e could em-
have divided his brain in two, separating forever his left Death Islendrn heweverl because Of the nt e .DOCFOr Of
brain from his right. First isolated from his mother by her lack of empathy, Such engagement is not Dr; jaäOn1st s own
poor grasp of reality, then from her and the rest of society ability to empathize with Alvard and 1 G- Our ln-
in mental institutions, and then from himself through brain nerability (surely these two featuresls lack Of Vul-
surgery, Nicholas is now isolated along with a young girl, Separate "The Deetor of Death Isiandn from E;-G connectfd)
another seemingly hopeless mental invalid, on an artificial i novellas, as does the introduction of the the two eérller
island. They are to serve as tools for the rehabilitation i tality and the oddly jarring references t D_ keine of impr-
of a third person, Ignacio, who is seen as potentially a far * of these differences adds up to a less ugif }cdenS' The Sum
more useful rrember of society. Nicholas has come to view either "The Island of Doctor Death and Of; novel? Shan
the artificial island, Doctor Island, as his guide, protec- "The Death of Doctor Island." er Stones Or
tor, and healer, though it has insisted that it is merely a "Thg E eflash M· „ _
surrogate for society. When Nicholas realizes that Doctor l¤Sions, paräicularlyliäcääi wi1;?:3)ol;S?>S lwerary al-
Island is using him simply as a rehabilitative device for bey, Little Tib, is empat ' dv lle Its limely
Ignacio and is willing to throw away Nicholas‘ life as it the reader with a vengeance. Thou h v$Sl?n osympathetlc to
throws away the girl's to that end, Nicholas‘ rage shakes l to Dickens in this novella the seäxtio E logs not allude
the island. The island retaliates by causing Nicholas to ! Little Tib, stennoh, blind, and abandogxä? a Chéractgr Of
retreat completely into his right brain, beccming Kenneth Slen indeed, and he shows al new transcendr tslqulte Dlckerk
the silent one, totally passive. The isolated child learns the isolated child. Here the child i ala lst avatar gf
that society offers only two choices: usefulness or utter Patents and is an outcast of a harsh gi tetrayed bl! hle
passivity. Since he cannot interact in a useful way with Sl/Stem, left to Wander alone and biindhntglatomal welfare
society, society makes his isolation complete. Cests of the system take him in in S itl twqother Sm}-
"'Ihe Doctor of Death Island" offers mre hope for the llteral position as a victim he, is P '€ Of Llttle- Tlb S
isolato. In this third variation on the motifs of isolates transcenaing his individual situatsplmtually a Vlctef;
and islands, Wolfe shows an adult strong enough to have reality itself, hy his divinit nloih an?] mdeed mundene
withstood the isolation of his childhood (his mother dead the child, healing end walking yen th; ;äI_K¤ä;;äa€‘;gnCh;;$t
 , en
62 63
not his Tathe who lived in her axn drearn wOld of drugs and
in a place called ''me Hse Of 3l February, '' And we kn
that the naratOr O this stOry is the adult Babcoc
ecreating his puz2ling childhood so that he can deal with
it.
t if Tackie had pOssessed a psyche nDre frail or a
family TTDre damaging, what sort o{ adolescent might he have
becaTe? Perhaps he uld have en as distur as Yicholas
nneth de Vore, the prOtagonist oE ''me ath of tor 3s
land . '' n this secOnd in the trilagy of novellas, which
received the l973 Mebula Awad, Yicholas is the fourteen
yearld sOn Of a n o lives in anothe so of dn
rld
His ther had neve been below the orbit o
mars, but she petended to have spent her
girlh on Earth; each reerence to the lie
illed Micholas with inexpressible fu and
shane. (p, l08, TTODD)
Life and psyche have brought Yicholas to such a pass that he
has spent a large porti On of his sho life in ntal in-
stitutions. Because o his violen and visims, doctors
have divided his brain in t, sepaating orever his left
brain ran his right, First isolated fan his nDther by he
poO grasp of reality, then fr her and the rest of eociety
in nental ititutions, and then fr hielf through brain
surge, Yicholas is n% isolated along with a young girl,
another sily hless nental invalid, on an artiicial
island. mey an to serve as tls for the rehabilitation
Of a thid penOn Ignacio, WhO is sn as tentially a fa
ra useful ner of sOciety Micholas has to view
the artificial island, tor Island, as his guide, protec-
tor, and healer, though it has insisted that it s ely a
surrOgate for society When Micholas nalizes that to
Island is usiq him sily as a rehabilitative devi fo
I9nacio and is willing to thr away Micholas ' life as it
thows away the girl 's to that end, Micholas ' rage shakes
the isand, me island retaliates by causing Yicholas tO
retreat completely intO his right brain, irq Kenth
the silent me, totally passive The isolated child leams
that society offers only t choices: usefulness o utter
passivity Sin he camot interact in a useful way wi
siety, society kes his isolation lete
''me DoctO oE ath Island'' offers rae hOpe for the
isOlatO, In this third variation on e nDtifs Of isolates
and islands, Wole shows an adult strong enoh to have
withsta the isolatim o his childhood (his mother dead
62

_
fofe he was Old en Ough tO rener her, his father lost in
ligion ad rceraieS), the iSOlati On O iiSOnt and
the isolati On Of COgeniC freeZng. kS SaVed Alvad a5
a child becau5e he SUrrOUnded hiel With the chaacteS
f Dickens; s put him in prison because he killed his
busine55 rtne tO kee COntrOl OVe hiS inventi OnI SPeak-
ks; and ks reeased him f pi5on, because his
knmlgeable sta9e Of e invention gave him bargaining
r. mra1ghOut his cogenically extended life, Alvad
fetai his sanity and his ability tO 3nanilate Others He
is, then, One WhO haS nOt bee brOken bY iSOlatiOn,
though he i5 n Ot an exela figure either he rdered
is nef, and he boobY-trapped his inventi On sO that Once
a gemrati On had ae dependent up On it (speaking bOOks
e the actual ability tO read them unnecessa), it vmld
gin to deteriorate without his intervention n
Fanklin, he Therefore, the novella's hope is nOt
glorious; one y survive isOlati but at a at. Alvard
lacks real empathy for anyone, including his lover, FOr
him, ople are no rae real, perhaps less eal, than the
aractes in his lOved Dickens
In the int t novellas of thi5 series, we c Ould em-
pathize With the lonely protagonists. In ''me t Or O
ath Island,'' hmever, because of the protagonist's own
lack of thy, such erqagnt is not pOssible. Our in-
ability to empathize With Alvard and his la of vul-
nerability (suely these two featues are connected)
sepaate ''me to oE ath Island'' r the two earlie
nOvellas , as does the intruction of the th of r-
tality and the oddly jarring eferences to Dickens me s
Of these diEEerences adds up to a less unified novella than
either ''The Island of cto Dea and Other Stories'' or
me ath of tor Island ''
me Eyeflash miracles'' (T) uses ny litea al-
lusione, rticularly to me Mizad of Oz, while its l Onely
, ittle Tib, is etic to others and sthetic to
the nader with a vengeance, mough Wolfe ds not allude
tO DickeM in this novella, the 5entimental character Of
ittle Tib, staunch, blind, and abandoned, is 0ite Dicken-
S3an indeed, and he shms a ne, transndentalist avatar Of
the isolated child. Here the child is betrayed by his
parents and is an outcast of a harsh, dictatorial welfae
SySt, left to Wander alone and blird until t other out-
Sts Of the syst take h3m in. In spite of Little Tib's
liteal iti as a victim, he iS spiritually a victor,
tranScending his individual situation, and i nda
ality itself, by his divinity. He is Krishna and Christ
e ild, healing and waling on the air. solation, when
63

it means one is an outlaw of ah immOY—°el_QOVerh“‘eht“'eS were top of the snow, as wolves do. Nashwonk, with his size and
Jesus fleeing intO Egypt: Kriehha hldlhg trom hlhg KemS€=‘· his solitary habits, may be a bear. Perhaps the Pamigaka,
and Little Tib dodgihg the Offiee ef Bloeehetle who carry "short—hahd1ed tools with heavy, curved h1adee,··
Improvement——Cen D¤FitY rather thah_deetr°Y or hereeh the and who eat many vegetables, are moose—totem people, or per-
individual. That is, it Can if Ohe 15 alreadY eh exoeP‘ haps, because they are squat and build lodges, they are
tional person, as theße three are ClearlY meeht te heaver—totem people (p. 188, TIOD). Minmunka, who threatens
In "The Eyeflash MiracleS," Wolfe takes the leolated them with °'a polearm ending in cruel hooks" and has "huge
and damaged child, QlVeS him SPeoial Powers ehe e_ epeclel green eyes that Seemed too beautiful for a masculine face,"
destiny, and allwe him fihelly te t¤¤mPh· eSCaP%“9 th°$e seems certainly a lion—totem pereeh (pp. 191-192, Tiob). Am
who would destroy him- Yet the h<>Velle ende wlth tlttle Tlb Glowing, who runs, has dark eyes, is beautiful, and shares
rgjgining Nitty, the Black man who beftlehded hlm at the tribal affiliatioh with a man named Fishcatcher, takes the
story's beginning, Walking ölO¤Q the Fallroad tracks; haPPY role of a mink. Later, Cutthroat meets vampires with human
with their lot but Still Oüteaeter both Poor, ohe hllhe' oh faces who are ccmpared to birds. we cannot be positive of
their way to S¤Qäl’lähd as it it were the prmlsed land' er each person's affiliation, but it is true that when
heaven. Little Tib mel! heal Seme peeple ehe lheplre Some Cutthroat finally sees the Great Sleigh he asks: "who is
others, but he remeine äh outcaet them eh hhohahgeth hh- that tall man with you? I think he has . . . wings?" (p.
yegenerated world: happier, mOfe CeSm}CallY S19h1tleeht' 236, TIOD). Whatever his affiliation, such a person pos-
but no luckier in thiS world then Tackle Bebeooie The lee- sesses a distinctively bird—like attribute. This pattern of
lated child may, ih ä rare ehe tteheeehdehtet lhStehee' et" totems, Wolfe says, moves from winter to spring, just as the
fer salvation through hie Sütterihgr but he will hot receive p1anet's weather gradually thaws in the course of the story.
it himself. _ _ There are other patterns as well. The narrator moves
The way to salvation, tfäheeehdehtel or otherwlee' th through a variety of cultures; from users of purely natural
Gene Wolfe's fiction, depehde ¤POh emPathY‘ mhthel ende? wood and stone tools, living in wooden lodges, closely at-
standing, COmDäSSiOhr and reeoghltloh ot the Other S tuned to the weather; to cave dwellers, whose bodies are
humanity. But of what does hl-lmanity Cehei-St? That oheftloh partly mechanical and who live in decayed machine—age con-
becqneg a geeurring motif throughout WOlte°$ WOrk_ lh Trlp structs awaiting the return of machine—age human beingS7 to
T};-ap" (Orbit 2, ed. Knight), ih "hYebem" (9.rB?i.l' ed' those who have control over machinery and therefore over the
Knight), in "The Toy Theater" (Ofhlt gr ed- K‘°{lght' ehe weather itself, the inhabitants of the Great Sleigh who are,
TIOD), and in "The Fifth Head et Cerheruen ee' it is implied, responsible for "a reflector of bright,
Knight, and FH), tOf example- ohe ef wolteie met eleborete finely divided metal dust" which will bring spring to the
nsss Of the motif occurs in “TfäCklhQ SOhQ°° (TIoD)· the wintery planet (p. 234, TIOD), People move from stone—age
surface, "Traeking SOhQ" is a rather griheeome ehe epleeelc tools to primitive mechanisms or only partly understood use
tale; a man meets one humaneid Speeles atter ehother' of machines to highly skilled use of science and technology.
eating SOme« Oh hie Qheet ter eemethlhg Called the Gteet Cutthroat also moves through a variety of belief sys-
S1ej_gh," As usual in Wolfe'S StOI‘1eS,_h¤weVe*?·_ there le tems, which might be taken as a lightning history of
more to deal with than the S¤tteCe· Flret· lt ls e tetem religion. In the first cultures he visits, religion serves
story: to explain nature, and its rituals are meant to help the
. . . . practitioners live in nature. In the cave of the half-
The protagoniet gets hie eüglhei erlehtetloh mechanical people, religion serves to control people and is
from a wolf tribe, then lives in a world in represented by a dictatorial leader. The people of the
which the roles of moose, llOn, deer, mlhk and Great Sleigh may not have a religious system at all, but
so on are taken by semi—human beings. Wolves they do have an ethical system by whose logic they govern
are winter symbols, of course, and birds symbols their behavior. One can see a parallel in movement between
Of spring-(4) these three states of religious belief and those of Earth:
_ first the pantheistic and shamanistic religions of the ear-
The people (we must call them that) wlth whom Cutthroat liest people, then the stern nnnotheistic religions SLlCh öS
Stays do not mimic every tfält of thelr toteh‘S' but we do Jüdaism, Christianity, and Islam, and HOSE recently such
notice that the first group, the Wiggikki, sings and runs on sthical Systems as Deism and ExiStentialiSm_
64 65
_ _ __
it neans one is an outlaw Of an iral govent--as were
Jesus fleeing into Egypt, Krishna hiding fr King a,
and Little Tib dodging the Office of BiOgenetic
Improvement--can puify athe than destroy O harden the
individual. mat is, it can if one is already an excep-
tional rson, as these three are clearly nBant to be
In ''me eflash miracles,'' Wolfe takes the isolat
and darnaged child, gives him special powers and a special
destiny, and alls him finally to trih, escaping the
who would destroy him, Yet the vella es with Little Tib
ejoining Mitty, the Black man who befriended him at the
story's beginnirq, walking along the railroad tacks, happy
with their lot but still tcasts, both , one blind, on
thei way to Sugarland as if it were the prised land, or
heaven- Little Tib y heal s people and inspire saTe
others, but he remains an outcast f an unchanged, un-
regenerated rld happie, nDre co5mically significant,
but luckier in this world than Tackie Bahk me iso-
lated child y, in a rare and transndental instan, of-
fer salvation through his sufferiq, but he will t receive
it himsel
me way to salvation, trarscendental or othise, in
Gene Molfe's fiction, depends upm thy nutual under-
standing, compassion, and recognition of the othe's
hwTanity t of what ds hnity nsist? mat questi
becares a recurriq natif throughout MOlfe's rk in ''Trip
Trap'' (Orbit 2, ed. Knight), in ''Eyebem'' (Orbit 7, ed
Might), in ''The Toy Theater'' (Orbit 9, ed Kight, and
TIOD), and in ''me Fifth Head of Ceberus'' (Orbit l0 ed
Might, and FH) , for ele, One of MOlfe 's TTDst elaborate
uses of the rati{ n in ''Tacking Song'' (TIOD) On the
surfa, ''Tracking Smg'' is a rathe grues and episOdic
tale: a man meets one hwnanoid species a{ter another,
eating some , on his quest fo sthiq called the ''Great
Sleigh'' hs usual in Molfe's stories, however, there is
nDre to deal with than the surface Fist, it is a tot
story:
me protagonist gets his original orientation
fr a wolf tibe, then lives in a world in
which e roles o e, lion, deer, mink and
sO On are taken by seM-hn ings Molves
are winte synbols, of aee, and birds sls
of spring ( 4)
me le (we must call them that) with whom CutthrOat
stays do not mimic every trait of their toten6, but we
notice at the first grp, the Miggikki, siqs and ruM m
64

t
top of the snm, as wOlves do, Na5hwonk, with his si2e and
i's solita habits, may a a. PeFhaps the Pamigaka,
o ca ''shOrt-handled tls with hea, curved blades
and whO eat n' vetableS ae setOtem OQle, O Per-
haps, because they are squat and build lod9es, they are
ave-totem peOple (p , l88, TIOD) , minka, who threatens
with ''a polea endi in cruel hooks'' and has ''huge
gfeen eyes that seemed t autiful Eor a sculine fa, ''
rtainly a lim-totem person (pp l9l-l92, TIOD). Am
Gling, o n1ns, has dak eyes, is beautiful, and shares
tril affiliation with a n d Fjshcatcher, takes e
ole o{ a Tni'nk. te, Cutroat ets vires wi human
fas who are canpared to birds, Gannot be itive Of
each persOn's affiliati On, but it is true that when
cutthroat finally sees the Geat Sleigh he asks: ''wtlo is
that tall man with y? I thinX he has , wings?'' (p,
236, TOD) , ateve his affiliatim, su a person -
sesses a distinctively bi-like attibute , mis ttern O
tot, Wolfe says, Eaves fr winte to spring, just as the
planet's nather gradually tha in the arse Of the stO,
mere ae othe ttecns as well , me rrato nDves
though a vaFiety of cultures; fran users o purely tual
a stone tools, living in en lodges, clOsely at-
tuned to the weather; to cave dwelles, wh0se bOdies ae
ctly anical and Who live jn decayed machineage n-
stnlcts awaiting the eturn of Tnachine-age hn ings; to
the who have control over ine and theefOe over the
ather itself, the imabitants of the Great Sleigh who are,
it is implied, esponsible or ''a eflectOr Of bright,
finely divided metal dust'' which will bring spring tO e
intery planet (p, 234, TIOD) le rave an stOne-age
tls to primitive chanis or only paly underst u
Of chines to highly skilled use o science and technOl,
Cutthoat also raves thrgh a vaiety Of lief sys-
tems which might be taken as a lightning hist Ory Of
nligion In the firet cultures he visits, ligi es
tO explain natue, and its rituals ae neant tO help the
Pactitiones live in natue. In the cave Of the half-
anical le, ligion senFe to ntol pele and is
repesented by a dictatorial leader, The peOple Of the
Gteat Sleigh may not have a religis syst at all blt
ey do have an ethical syst Whose lo9ic they gOvem
ei havio, One can see a parallel in ravnt betn
?e th states of eligis belief and thOse Of Earth
Ent e pantheigtic and shnistic religions oE the eac-
liest le, then the ste notheistic religions such as
Udaism, Chigtianity, and Tslam, and nDst rently su
0il 6eterr6 as ism and Existentiali.
65

‘ ividuals, 1t cannot l ·
These patterns bring us back to Wolfe's theme of the impossible. That Zecestjleihilgiäli§eä;ä;tw;;?eFSt?sd1ni
nature of humanity. The Planet upon which Cutthroat travels nevelle thue fer, nseveh American Ni hte „ heree S ·H}eS.
is populated by humanoid species of varying levels of sen- te Auerica etrueelee te understand ige °e le Ü lzislto
tience, from vampires with human faces, to snow monkeys, to eereeptuel limitetiehs keep him from eveseusee ' tysd. ls
seemingly primitive peoples such as the Lenizee and the happens during his visit. We share Nadan 3-äfafn mgdwhs
Pamigaka, to the more sophisticated Cutthroat, to the highly etrugele Since the truth ef evehte ie embeee e irzals ,'
advanced inhabitants of the Great Sleigh. One might visual- the mehy leyere ef hie eeree wel li .e e. s bno es Y 1]
ize this as a world in which all stages of human evolution leyerg, of storytelling as welsl. Becgiisea tiiilss ist}; fliqctnilägj
Cosxlse None Os the spsclss hsrs rscogsäzss the h¤“¤·¤¤v because despite the lucidity of the story's unfoldin w«
Of a“Y Gehe? Speclefg am not a“.a“““al·° SaYS _F““h‘°at· gannot possibly dctcminc an exact chain of events we ?rus«
äxgeäonglenife replies, All the animals say that (p. 179, ultimately realize that no final truth can be known,. Perfec
. et each believes its own species to be human. We, uhderetehdihe ef people, ef evenee ef en eh. . .
sharing Cutthroat's opinion as he writes us his daily Sible, This is not, however a matt fy dlng }S·'1mPOSi
record, see most of the species as human, at least those reeeghitieh ef the eemlexitjef exieesgneeer espelßlt ls ‘
with whom Cutthroat can speak. We find their dismissal of Wolfe expreeeee ehee e lexit b _le_ l
other speaking humanoids as inhuman not only unconvincing pereeptieh ee multiferieeemäne eey , ye P1 Ang laYerS °·
but savage: Wolfe describes one species eating another in a ehaeeleeist could hope fer „SeVen Arien flgellgg as ef)/_ äfj
way which makes us think inmediately of cannibalism——"I felt frame tale remindingeus that it has thesrlcan tlghfs 15 ‘
sick-at the thought of eating the girl's flesh, no matter takes place within ie. Only ee we finieseäee O alferdwhai
how lhhumeh. ehe leekeen (P, 177, TIOD·). We know also that reelize how many frames Wolfe emeloye fee ehgveeoa o wi
these speaking humanoids vary greatly in appearance frcm one eludee with e dieleeee between ewe W ' VY Con
another so that we then become uncertain about dismissing Nadahe mother ehe hie fieneee Yeemin°ms„Bqeweji;iSu“ee iiee b‘
the h‘“““‘a“ltY ef these Creatures with whom Cetthreet Cannot corded by an outside voice, neither that of Nadanoilnler of $1
speak, such as the snow monkeys. Where, we ask, does one meh whe Seht Nedehe diary te hie meh A h . ‘
draw the line between human and animal, sentient and the meet eueeinet we ee eh eh GL satt wlll U
unconscious? Where, in fact, does one draw the line between this etery_ Y ew e $t°rYt°llmQ frames O1
living and mechanical, for there are the Min to oonsider and
the robots which (who?) help Cutthroat. Cutthroat recog-
nizes the humanity in each rson he meets, perhaps because, - _
as an amnesiac, he does notpinow his own place in the order. narrator Of dlalogus between msther and Yasmin
Recognizing people's humanity, he chooses always to work _ _
cooperatively rather than competitively, whenever he has a g letter snslosmg mary
choice.
That is the real message of Cutthroat's taped diary, [ . .
which we (like the inhabitants of the Great Sleigh) are ( geg; grégtsn äyh
hearing. At present we do not confront other sentient { s aus e
species, nor do we yet deal with beings who make us question
the division between living and mechanical. However, we . _
constantly face other human beings who have alien religions, Wüsten by Hassan Kerbelal
cultures, and levels of sophistication, and in our confron-
tations we consistently treat those human beings as if they At _
were inhuman, subhuman. "Tracking Song" reminds us that r€l§£><i]ii£;‘g? thw: dxiugäi isses? ni: U13; Sd't(]? quesäon tm
calling another group of people inhuman, calling them gooks woman (Nadanls mother?) asia "Y eäsniguér. Q 0lde1
or niggers or honkies or slants, does not change the fact of wI·j_tihg?„ ehe answers heeeelf enl' „ eg 3* ( 15 hl!
their humanity. Instead, it turns life into an armed battle Pgrhape the entire diary is e fOY per ag; e P. ,'TIOD)
that empathy could transform into cooperation. letter whieh eheleeee ehe die _’;e we examne th‘
Each individual is, finally, an alien in the other's investieeter who eeenee e xy' ls Yu an a pnvae
eyes. While empathy makes a bridge across the gulf between ° gsm m°“eta¤·lY °“1Y lf there 1*
66 67

t _ t
indiVUalSI t CannOt Ce tne 9ai teCt UnrStanl
s impossible That s clear in Gene Olfe's fines'
vella thus faf, ''Seven rican Mights'' Here a visitO:
to rica stles tO urstand its people, yet his
rptual litati Ons kp him fr even understanding wha'
apns duri his visit, shae Madan Jaffazadeh ':
styggle since the tnlth Of events is ded t mly iI
te n layers Of his rceptual limitations but in man
ayen of stOtelliq as ll cause this is a fiction
ause despite the lucidity Of the story 's unolding w
t sibly detei an exact ain of events, s
ultitely ealize that final truth can be knam. Per{ec'
undestandi Of le Of events o{ anything is impOs'
sible. mis is nOt, hver a matter for despair;it is
enition Of the clexity of existen.
lfe eesses at caTplexity by building layers O;
cepti On as multifarious and as intriguing as any a'
chaeolist ald h for ''Seven American Mights'' is
fr tale ' ndiq us that it hae the to alte wha
takes place within it. Only as n finish the vella do m
reali2e h Ow many fames olfe eloys, for the sto n'
cludes with a diale between t women assu to b
Madan's e and his Eian Yain, me dialogue is e
rded by an tside voice, neither that of Madan nor o th
n who sent adan's diary to his rather. A chart will b
the most succinct ay to sh the stotelling fs o;
is story.
rator oE diale tween er and Yain
letter enclosi dia
diay witten by
Madan affar2adeh
written by t3assan Kerbelai
At ea level muat leam n ays to questim th
liility of e diay itelE. In the dile, Ue olde:
WO0 (adane mothgr) asks, think thig ig hi;
iti^ and anmen helf only ''rh8pa'' (p. 4lO, TIOD)
the entin diay ig a forge xt eine th
l0tte t encleg e dia. It i9 itten by a priv8t
instigator o sta to ggin rily ly iE the i;

reason to believe that Nadan still lives. The investigator, _
therefore, might forge all or part of the diary to encourage ln the tneäter maY naYe been- AS tet the Sixth egg, Nadan
his client to continue the investigation. If the diary is hellebvlete tthitettä Eéelläe have äearched his room and stoloh
entirely the work of Nadan Jaffarzadeh it is still to be 1 ' ne er exp anatlOn· The Sixth eQQ may
questioned. Nadan says that he has deleted those portions have been the ehe eentalninq the hällllcinegen, and its ef-
of the diary which reveal the purpose of his visit, though äreéte n‘aYNha;e ggaäaed te l<>Se a day. Our proof? "Seven
he does reveal a purpose at the end of his diary when he mean lg S eeerl S 0hlY Six nights-
speculates that "I might seek to claim the miniatures of our De tne la}/ete Otpeteeptieh Stop here? Certainly not,
heritage after all" (p. 409, TIOD). Furthermore, this lover fer Wolter OF Nadan, lntr0duCeS two scientific Specglatigng
of romance and drama reveals that he consciously alters his that would Change Nadan°S Pe!-’¢eDtlOn Of reality. In the
diary, when he says, '°here I am not exaggerating or coloring tust:
the facts, though I confess I have occasionally done so N K h
elsewhere in this chronicle" (p. 401, TIOD). ew we new t at there is ¤hlY ene pafticle of
Beyond these possible conscious alterations of the each VatletY lhelltfeh, pOSitron, and electron],
novella's central document, moreover, are those subconscious mOVlnQ_ backward and ferward in time, an electron
or unintentional alterations of events and motives which the when lt ttaVel$ öS we ÖO, a poeitron when its
diary's writer must inevitably impose. In any first person ¤@mp¤ral_d1Sp1a¤@¤e¤; 15 retrograde, the same
narrative, we know to question the narrator‘s reliability few Partlcles eppeaflhg billions of billions of
because we know that any witness is fallible. Here, tlmee te make UP ä S1hQle Object, and the same
however, our eyewitness is more fallible than usual. few Pettlelee ferming all the objects, as it
Nadan's perceptual accuracy must be questioned at many, many were, et the Same Set ef pastels. (p. 366,
levels. First, he wears cultural blinders: he is a Moslem TIOD)
Iranian frau a privileged culture visiting a decayed Western _
civilization whose attitudes toward religion, politics, and Matter le: theh: lmpermanent and insubstantial oxistjn
t l th f t t' t t th t ry only in the present mome t 'f Pl I g
women o name on y ree ac ors per 1nen o e s o _ n as 1 neo- t ' l
are diiite diffefeht from hie Owh_ Next, we know that the hectically rebuilding the urniverse beforeaoäeleyegee Zuger;
same rcmantic and dramatic impulses that caused Nadan COn* trheetyv lne1‘§lentellY¤ juetifies the use of diary format, for
Sciously to alter his diary might also direct him aubcon- lt cgncerns itself with each day as it occurs rather than in
sciously. Further, Nadan tells us that he is on a secret then Stehtlal retrospect.
mission and is suspicious of several of his shipboard-com- While Nadan Claims universal acceptance (··how wo knew
panions because of it. His behavior can be explained either ' ' l tot the flfet theery, the second one is entirely
by an understandable suspicion of people who might be a le Own-
genuine threat or by paranoia. If it is explained by _
paranoia, any or all of the remaining alterations of his Tehlélht, When-we walked beneath its [tho old
perceptions may be caused only by his imaginatiom Many hlghwel/°S] I'UlneCl Overpasses, they seemed inox-
further alterations in Nadan's ability to perceive the world Pteeelhly ancient and sinister, lt ooonrrod to
accurately are suggested in the unfolding of the story. me then that there may be a time—flaw, such as
Nadan suspects that he may have been given a mind—alter<lOnEll §ettOnOmeY—°S report frem Space, somewhere in the
drug while aboard the ship to America and that tainted f antic. How is it that this western shore is
may have caused hallucinations. On his first visit to the Here antiquated in the remains of a oivilization
theater, he eats a candy egg with a peculiar taste: perhape het Yet a century dead than we are in the Shadgw
it, too, is tainted. Then, Nadan buys a hallucinogenic drug of Darius? May it not be that every ship that
and impregnates one of the six remaining eggs, resolving tO plowe the Sea moves through ten thousand years?
eat one each night, not knowing which contains the drug (p. 372, TIOD)
(which he suspects may actually be impotent), playing a SGI-’t Perhaps h
of Russian roulette. We know that he eats five of the six _ suc a speculation belongs more to romance than to
eggs: his mind may be altered further on any one of the5e ä§;heneer Yet the reader cannot help but notice that
occasions, or on all, if all the eggs are tainted as the one expllngten°S Öeeay seems mcre extensive than l00 years Cguld
6 ain. The two speculations, if taken as scientific,
V
,1 69
_
nan tO believe that Maan still lives me investigator,
theef Ore , might fOrge all o pa of the dia to encrage
his client to atinue the investigatiOn Tf the dia is
entirely the rk of Madan Jaffar2adeh it is still to
questiOned Madan says that he has deeted Ulose pOions
O the diary which eveal the of his visit, though
he does reveal a purpose at e end of his dia when he
speculates that ''I might sk to claim the miniatures o r
heitage a{te all'' (p 409, TIOD) Fuenare, this lover
of anance and dr reveals that he nsciously altes his
dia, en he says, ''here I am rat exaggerating or loriq
the Eacts , though confess I have occas ionally do eo
elsewhere in this chronicle'' (p, 40l, TIOD),
yond these possible conscious alterations of the
ella's ntal docunent, reover, ae th0se suhonscious
or unintentional alteratio of events and tives Which e
dia's write nust inevitably ' e. In any fist persOn
nacrative, we kn to question the nacatOr's reliability
because we know that any witness is fallible. Here,
howeve, ou eyewitness is more fallible than usual.
Madan's perceptual accuracy must questi Oned at ny, ny
levels. First, he wears cultual blinders he is a mlem
Tranian fr a privileged cultue visitiq a decay stem
civili2ation wh attitudes tmad religion, pOlitic5, and
women, tO name only three factos petint tO e stO,
are quite diferent f his mn, xt, kaF that the
s3ne ntic and drtic impuses that caused Madan n-
scisly to ater his dia might also diect him subcOn-
scisly Further, Yadan tells ue that he is m a secet
mission and is suspicis of veral Of his shipbOa -
ni because of it. His havior can be explained eier
by an understandable suspicim Of pe Ople O might a
genuine threat or by paranoia. If it is explained bY
paanoia, an o all o the remainirq alteratiO Of hiS
rceptions y be used onl by his imaginati On anY
further alteratioM in Madan's ability tO ceive e rld
accurately ae suggested in the unfOlding Of e stO
Madan suscts tt3at he y ve en given a nnind-altei
drug ile rd the ship to Anerica and that tainted f
y ve cau halluciti. m his fit visit tO m
theater, he eats a Gandy with a peculiar taste rha
it, t, is tainted. men, Madan buys a hallucinic d
a egnates one of the six rinirq egg9, nsOlvi tO
eat one ea night, not knowi hi cOntai the d
(i he suscts y aually be itent), playing a
of Rusgian rlette. k t he eats fi Of e SiX
gs: his y alted fuher m an Of e
ion6, or all, i 8ll e s are taint e

n the theater TTa y have be en. As for the sixth eg g, Yadan
lieves that the po lice have searched his and stOlen
't, but thee is anothe exp1anation. me sxth egg y
have en the one containing the hallucin o4 en, and its ef-
fects y have caused hi1n to .l Ose a day. Ou r pr f? ''Seven
rican Njghts'' de5cri be s only six nights,
the layers of cception sto here? CertainlY nOt,
for Mo1e, or Madan, introduces two scientific sculatiOM
that would change Madan's perceptiOn O reality, n the
first
Y ax we kn m that there is only One pa ticle Of
each vajety neutrOn, po sitrOn, and electrOnl
vi ckwad and forward in time, an electOn
when it travels as we do, a pOs itron when its
te ral dislacent is etrogcade, the same
Eew pacticles ap pe aing billions O billi Ons Of
tis to ke up a single object, and the s
few paticles fo ing all the Objects, as it
were, of the s e 5et of pastels. (p 366,
TToD)
matter is, then, impe rm anent and insubstantial, existing
m ly in the pesent nt, as if neo-Platonic angels we n
hectically re bu ildi rq the univese be f Ore ou r eyes 5uch a
eory, incidentally, justifies the use oE dia fO t, f Or
it concens itsel with each day as it Oc cus rathe than in
iutantial etros pect
While Yadan claims universal acceptance (''n% we kn
. '') fo the fist theo , the second o is entirely
his .
TOni9ht, en We Walked beneath 1tS Ithe Old
highway's7 ruined oveasses, ey s ix-
pessibly ancient a nd sinister. Tt curred tO
then that tere may be a ti-flaw, such as
astron aTB rs re po rt fr s pa ce, s aTe wh ere in e
Atlantic. H aF is it th at this western shoe is
ra re anti ated in th e e ma ins of a civilizati On
nOt ye a centu dead than we are in e shad
Of rius? may it not be that eve ry ship that
plms the sea Taves through ten th Ousand yeas?
(Q. 372, TIOD)
such a lati long5 rare to r nce than to
SCience, yet the reade cannot help but notice thet
aShiton's decay se fe extensive than lOO years a ld
elain. me two 5 eculations i taken as scientific,

remind us that Wolfe's work is categorized as science i Easter has ne meSSage for America. His own country, Iran,
fiction; if taken as romantic, that it defies categoriza— E ie at the apex Of pewer and wealth: from that height, it is
tion. Scientific or romantic, the two speculations further impossible for him to see any signs of birth at the nadir.
complicate any determination of a specific, independently Those readers who are members of America before the
observable chain of events. fall look hard for a signs of rebirth in the rubble that
Wolfe does not build so many layers of perception and Wolfe describes, and they can be found. At the Washington
of storytelling to fool us, though there is about his theater, drama is being revived: art arises from the decay.
stories an aura of the intellectual puzzle. Such complexity The American natives put much hope in the possibilities of a
mimics the human condition: all our lives are spent trying secret hidden beneath Mount Rushmore; Nadan speculates that
to determine the truth of events and motives, to pierce the secret may be the knowledge of the ability to grasp a
through barriers raised by our minds and cultures. We never trend, grapple with it, and control it. Whatever the
succeed, but we may learn a good deal in the course of the secret, perhaps the stone will roll back and the saving
struggle. "Seven American Nights" makes us struggle, but it secret will be revealed: the Easter setting offers hope.
teaches us as well. Any lesson about the human condition When Nadan first meets Ardis, he associates her with eggs,
sounds platitudinous and shallow in its simple statement. which are, of course, symbols of birth and Easter. Later he
The struggle to attain the lesson, or the struggle during rejects her, and kills her, because he finds that she pos-
which it is absorbed, gives it its profundity. "Seven sesses a deformity. She is mortal, vulnerable, and imper-
American Nights" is an Easter story that avoids platitude fect like the others. But perhaps Nadan's first impression
and sentiment, both conmon pitfalls of rebirth stories. was correct, and Ardis, in her imperfection, nevertheless
The last day which Nadan describes is Easter Day, and does represent an America rising out of its ashes. She is
all the events of the novella have led up to it. On each dead, but there are many like her, and perhaps some kind of
day of his visit, he eats a candy egg, one of the symbols of revitalizatien iS evolving from these mutated people, per-
Easter and rebirth. On Easter Day, he comes upon an Easter haps. This story does not have the triumphant strain of op-
procession that takes on symbolic meaning for him. timism so often found in Christian stories of rebirth. The
emphasis upon decay and struggle makes clear that renais—
When the old priest [who leads the procession] Sanee is Sl0W, difficult, and hard—earned.
was born, the greatness of America must have "Seven American Nights" addresses Americans as they
been a thing of such recent memory that few can live their liVeS now, because it shows wherein rebirth
have realized it had passed forever; and the en- lieS“in creative effort and in determination·——~how modestly
tige prOC955j_On—-fpqh [hg fljckeylng candleg in it begins and with what struggle lt UhfOldS itself. This
clear sunshine, to the dead leader lifted up, to i ViSiOn Of the O¤mlOhlY‘emPl<>Yed theme Shuns the usual pathos
his inattentive, bickering followers behind-- Of death and the fanfare of transfiguration, which we have
seemed to hg to iheethate the philosophy and the ecne to expect in stories of rebirth, a pattern which lurks
dileuua ot these people. go l felt, at least, in "'I'he·Eyeflash Miracles." Instead, Wolfe uses one of the
Until I saw thet they watched it as Uheem- Conventions of science fiction, life-after—the—apocalypse,
ptehehdihgiy as they might it they themselves and linverts a couple of other literary conventions; 1001
were only travelers abroad, and I realized that anether frame tale, is transferred West and
its ritualized plea for life renewed was more b€‘OG“@S °°SeVen American Nights," and the Western traveler to
foreign to them than to me_ (p_ 403, TIQD) the exotic decayed East, whom we remember from Sir Richard
Burton, T.E. Lawrence, and even Richard Haliburton, is
Throughout his visit, Nadan has searched for an apt symbol tranSfO¤¤ed inte an Eastern traveler visiting a strange ahd
of America; the eagle is now extinct, and Nadan puts in its Cmmblihq Occident. Wolfe turns all these convehtiohal
place first the nightmare and then its incarnation, the themes and forms them into a story distinctively his own,
actress Ardis. As he watches the procession, he sees in it That_tran$fOF¤\ötie¤ iS One reaeen for the judgment that it
a representation of America's essence, its determined in- ls ms finest Shert work. There are other reasons as well,
dividualism combined with its equal determination to act "SeVen American Nights" satisfies first at the level
collectively. He believes that the participants have no Of plO‘?· It Centains adventure and romance, horrible
hope or even understanding of a reborn nation. For Nadan, mnstersw beautiful ladies, and a convincing view of a crum-
70 71
emind us that Molfe's wOrk is categoized as science
fiction; if taXen as rntic, that it deie5 categoriza-
tion ScientiEic o anantic, the two speculations furthe
clicate any deteinatiOn Of a specific, independently
obseable chain of eventS.
Wolfe ds nOt build sO ny layes ot perption and
OE storytelling to fOOl us, though thee is about his
stoies an aua of the intellectual puzzle. Such lexity
mimics the hn conditi On all r lives are snt trying
tO detennine the tuth Of events and motives, to pierce
through baiers caised by r mis a cultuces. ve
succeed, but m y leacn a good deal in the course of the
struggle. ''ven hrerican Mights'' makes us stggle, but it
teaes us as ll my lesson aut the hunan ndition
sounds platitudinow and shallm in its sile stateTTent.
me struggle to attain the lesson, or the struggle during
which it is absObed, gives it its pofundity ''5even
ican Mights'' is an Easte story that avOids platitude
and sentint, both cn pitfalls of ebirth stories.
The last day Which Yadan describes is Easter y, and
all the events of the nOvella have led up to it On each
day of his visit, he eats a candy egg, one ot the sls of
Easte and ebih. On Easter y, he s upon an Easte
procession that takes on sic neaning for him.
Mhen the old priest Iwho leads the procession3
was born, the geatness of America must have
been a thi o such cent nera tht few can
have realized it had passed forever; and the en-
tie pessionf the flickering candles in
clea sunshine, tO the dead leader lifted up, to
his inattentive, bickeing followers behind--
seemed to TTe to incarnate the   ilosophy  a the
dile Of these people So felt, at least,
until T saw that they watched it as uncom-
prehendingly as they might if they then6elves
n only taveles abraad, and I cealized that
its ritualized plea for lie re was rare
{oeign to them than to ne. (p 408, TIOD)
mra3gha1t his visit, dan has searched for an apt sl
Of AneiCai the eagle ls a eXtinCt, and Madan UtS in itS
pla ficst the nightma and then its incarnation, the
actress Ardis he watches e pession, he sees in it
a representatiOn Of ri's essence, its deteined in-
dividualism cOmbined with its equal deteination to act
llectively He lieves that the participants have
or even understanding of a rebocn natim Fo Madan,
7O

_ _
ster haS no SSa9e EO rica HiS mn COuntry, Iran,
, at the apex Of p0wer and wealth an that height, it is
ssible for hitn tO see any signs of birth at the nadir
Those reader5 whO ae mbes of Anxerica beore the
fal lk hard f Or a signs Of reDirth in the rubb3e that
lfe de5CfibeS, and they Can fOUnd At the Washin9t On
eater, dama iS ln9 eVivedi art aise5 the deCay.
me rican natives put ch h in the ssibilities o a
secret hidden neath unt Rusre; Madan sPeculates that
te 5ecret maY the knmledge O the ability tO grasp a
trend, gapple with it, and cOntrOl it. Whatever the
secet, perhapS the StOne Will rOll baCk and the SaVin9
secret will evealedi the Easter setting oers hope.
en Madan first meet,s dis, he assOciates he wi e99s,
i' a, of arse, sls Of birth and Easte Later he
rejectS her, and kill5 her, CaUSe he findS that She -
se5seS a defOitY. She iS rta, vuneable, and ir-
fect like the Othes. t rhaps Yada's first iressi On
was coCreCt, and ArdlS, ln her ifeCti On, neVetheleSS
ds epresent an hneica rising out oE its ashes. She is
ad, but there ae nY like her, and perha5 S kind O
revitalization is evolving fr these tated peOple. Per-
ps. mis story ds not have the triwmhant strain Of op-
timism so often found in Chistian stoies of rebirth. me
hasis upon decay and stggle nakes clea that renais-
sanCe is Sl, dificult, and hardaMed
''Seven Ameican Nights'' addresses ATBricans as they
live their lives now, because it shows wherein ebirth
lies--in creative efEort and in detennination--hm estly
it gins and with what stle it unfoìds itself. mis
vision o the anDnlyloyed the shuns the usual pathos
Of death and the fanfare o traMiguration, whi we have
ae to exct in 5toies of ebirth, a patten ich Jurks
in ''me Eyeflash miracles.'' 3tead, Wolfe uses o o th
aventions of scien iction, life-after-the-apocalypse,
and inverts a couple of othe litera conventiOM; 1001
ian Mi hts, ather fane tale, is transfered West and
cs ''ven ATerican Mights,'' and the Mestern traveler to
the exotic decayed Eat, wh we renBmbe fr Sir Richard
BUtOn, T.E, awrence, and even Richard Haliburton, is
tafO into an Easten traveler visiting a strange and
Cling Occident. Wolfe tu all these conventional
themes and fos them into a 5to distinctively hi5 am.
mat tansfotion is one reas for the judnt that it
lS hiS ist short wok. mere ae other easons as well,
Seven hTerican Yights'' satisfies first at the level
Of lOt. t contains adventure and romance, horrible
nStes, beautiful ladies, a a nvincirq view of a cnm-
7l

bling Washington, rooted in the city's present geography and VIII
decaying in believable ways. The plot leads us to a complex
statement about life, as we have already seen. The diary THE mOK OF THE NEW SUN
tom, with its expressions of the narratOr'S p@fC@DtUal —‘° —
guirks and limitations, gives a clear vision of Nadan
Jaffarzadeh's character: a bit vain, suspicious, intel—
ligent, adventure—seeking, romantic, yet cautious and con- with the publication Of The Shadow Of the Torturer
servative withal. More remarkable is Wolfe's control over / first Volume Of The BOOk é
the many layers of perception and narration of the story, ” the tation Changed fr écUre SCi€nCe_
resulting in a purposeful ambiguity that nevertheless F‘?P‘é‘_On writer to that Of a good End famous One All four
retains Sriarp Clarity. woife Sometimes allows hiS··am;)igUity have made the Locus science-fiction best seller
U? bbbb Into bbsbbblby ( Tb the. Tower H ) Or a list, as have the short story collections published after
Slbblb mental puzzle (ucherry Jubllee )(6)° At hls besti as The Shadow of the Torturexw Though Wolfe may have been
ln "S@V@¤ Am@1’1Ca¤ N_1QhtSr" from bbbblbf and mäsäirx aräses facetious when he claimed that he wrote the tetralogy partly
beauty' bbb fmStratlOn' Ib the best O Gene O ils S mit SO 5cience—fiction fans would masquerade in costumes in-
Ywéié S€’o??§§”§§“S.Ä $€§“.l“Eo?.Ü“i„§§„ E‘§SEi§o’S?·TE§°oooiEi?o; Swed by ib he bbbbbbly did want bbb bbbblbbbbv bbbb
bb _ „ —-————-———~—·— ’ 5 erade ' lies. Whether or not an one has et one to a
bf Dreams., 19 Klrby Mccauleyls , ——PaFk Forces antlägäogyf and Icängäntion äHnpSeverian's fuligen capeif The Booik of) the New
ume bbbb Thtlllmg .wOr¥d€r Story ln the June —S-ag sun has brought a much wider popcularity than was Wo1fe's
Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine-—Gene Wolfe demonstrates -E-6-{Om Every volume has been rbminated for the Hugo and
that science fiction can hold its own according to the most NebUla'awardS· The ShadOw Of the Torturer won the 1981
Gxbbblbg Standards Of Sclence blbblbb and aCad€m€' world Fantasy Award and the British Science Fiction Society
NOTES Award, The Claw of the Conciliator won the 1981 Nebula
Award, and The Sword of the Lictor won Locus' 1983 Best Fan-
„ . tasy Novel Award. Wolfe has served as guest of honor at
(1) Tbb vyomaq Wbb Ifovgd the CF-mtaur Pholusfg./giää many science-fiction conventions, and his name appears
' bbbbbbbb ' pp' , prcminently on any magazine cover that encloses one of his
” ‘ _ stories. Should blurbs with his name begin to appear on new
§§§ ZI$$;‘Si,O§§R’g‘"i,iS‘;$’;§'.I' Näg 3‘““;§96,?;r;’;"„;§§i;§§‘(Ne, „ oooko by other science—fiction am-,„., his Saas 1,,
' ——' ° science fiction will be firmly entrenched.
" · ' II ‘
York: D€”laCOrt€’ l970)° 1 'I‘he Book of the New Sun consists of The Shadow of the
(4) J?a“„G°rd°nf Ab Imlervlew wlthlgene Wolfe' 1 Torturer, The Claw of the Conciliator, The Sword of the Lic-
' S"“““€r 1981; R' ° . tor, and The Citadel of the Autarch. Wolfe is writing a
"TO the Dark Tower came; ln Orblt 19, €d Damon ( h€ tetralwy called The
ffnlght (New ¥Ork‘ _'Hamer' 197,/)' ?p°Slg0_l25'F. tion Urth of the New Sun, and has already written a book aboü
(6) Ch€r_YY JUb1l€e· Writing The Book called The Castle of the Otter (he is plan-
' 18 Jam l982' pp' 108-1 ° ning a second volume called Return to the Castle of the
Otter). Every published volume, including the limited edi-
tion Castle, has met with strong reviews and lively sales:
all hardback first editions quickly sold out, and all
volumes have been reprinted by the Science-Fiction Book
Club. Among the most thoughtful reviews of the tetralogy
are Colin Greenland's review of the first two Volumes in
, Elizabeth Hull's overview in Extraglation, Al-
gis Budrys' series of reviews on each volume in The Magazine
„ Of Fantasy and Science Fiction, and John Clute's front—page
review of The Citadel of the Autarch, combined with Michael
D1rda's interview with Wolfe, in the Washington Post Book
72 73
_ ___t __ ___
bling Mashi ng ton, r t ed in e city's present ge og raphy and
decayin in lievable ways. m e plot leads us to a lex
stat nt a ut lie, as we have alceady s ee n. m e diay
{orm, with its expre5sions Of the narator's pecceptual
quiks and limitati Ons, gives a clear visiOn Of Yadan
affarzadeh's chaacter a bit vain, suspicious, intel-
ligent, adventure-s ee king, r ana ntic, yet cautious and con-
se rv ative withal Ore re ma kable is MOlfe's contFOl ovr
the many layes of pecepti On and nacration of the story,
resulting in a puposeul a Tnb iguity that nevertheless
etains sha clarity. Wolfe s t ' s all as his iguity
tO turn intO Obscuity (''TO the Dak Tmer '')(5) or a
si le ntal puzzle (''Cher ry Jubilee'')(6). At his be st, as
in ''Seven rican Mights,'' fr an puz2le and ny ste arises
beauty, nOt fstration. In the best of Gene Wolfe's short
wOrks, as here-and I would add to that list such uncol-
lected stories as the fou Continu stoies,''me Detective
Of Dreams'' in Kirby m auley's r Forces antholy, and
''me st mrilling Monde StOry'' in the une l982 Isaac
A _simov's Scien Fiction Ma0azine- ne W01fe de nstates
that science fiction Ga n hold its accoding to th e nD st
exacti standa s of scien fiction a rd aca de .
'
(l) ''The Woman Who Loved the Centaur Pholus,'' Isaac
As_i nD v's Science iction Ma 0azine, De mbe r l979, pp.
l08-ll8.
(2) ''H se of m n stOrs,'' IF June l968, pp lOl-20.
(3) ''me H Of War,'' Mova l, ed. tbr Harrison (mw
YOrk: De lacorte, l970).
(Q) Oan Gordon, ''An Interview Mith Mole,'' Scien
Fiction Review, S r l98l, p. l9.
(5) ''TO the Dak Towe Came,'' in Orbit l9, ed, Damon
M ight ( Ye w York E3a 0e r, l977), pp. l20-l25
(6) ''Cherry Jubilee,'' _Isaac Asimov's Science Ficti On
ma0a2ine, l8 an. l982, pp. l08-l35.
72

_________________\ ___
MII
E K OF THE YEW SUY
iM the publication o The Shadow of the Torturer,
e first vOl Of me k Of e Yew Sun, Gene MOlfe's
eputation an9 f that Of a bUt ObSCue SCience-
iction writer tO that Of a g and fus One All f Ou
ls have made the Ocus science-fictiOn best seller
ist, as have the shOrt stOry collecti Ons published after
me shad o the Torturer. Though olfe may have been
facetious wen he claid that he WrOte the tetal eatly
so 5cience-ficti On fans wOud mas0erade in coSts in-
5pi' ed by it, he prObably did want the pOpularity such
erade ' lies Mether or not anyOne has yet gone to a
convention in Severian's {uligen cape, me k Of the w
sun s brght a ch wide popularity than was MOlfe ' s
foe. Every vol has been ninated for the Hugo and
Mebula awards, The Shadow of the Torturer won the l98l
rld Fantasy Award and the British Science iction SOciety
Aard, The Claw of the ConciliatOr wOn the l98l Yebula
Awa, and me Srd Of the LictOr wOn Locus ' l983 st an-
tasy Movel Award Wolfe hat seed as est o honor at
many sciencefiction conventions, and his na appears
pranintly m any magazine cove that encloses one of his
stories Should blubs with his begin to appear on mw
books by othe science-fiction author, his status in
science fiction will be finnJy entenched,
me k of the M Sun nsists of me Shad of the
T_Ourer, me Claw of the Conciliator, me Srd of the ic-
tOr, and m_e Citadel of the Autarch, _Mole is writing a
fif nion l, a a to the tetal lled me
Uh Of the Yew Sun, and has aleady itten a bOOk aba3t
iti me k ll me Cast1e of the Otter (he is plan-
ning a second volume called Return to the Castle of the
ter) Eve pub3ished l, including the limited edi-
tlm Castle, has t with trong reviews and lively sales:
all hardback first editions quickly sold Out, and all
V0les have been repinted by the Science-Fiction k
Cl AnDng the nDst thoughtful revie of the tetralo
are COlin Geenland's review Of the fist twO vOls in
ation, Elizath Hullls ovenFi in Extra00lation, Al_
gS dm seies of views on ea vOl in me 0azine
O_ Fantas and scien Fiction, and ohn Clutels front
Vl Of e Citadel of the Autarch, abined with michael
Ddals interview i i e, in the aghinton et k
73

World.(l) of cOUL‘Se« and each Will be discussed separately with th
Gerald Jonas of the New York Times Book Review waited constant acknowledgment that it exists to enhance the othe
until the release of The Citadel of the Autarch to review elements of the book and to help form a complex and unifie
the series but gave it unqualified praise when the review work.
came, saying of Wolfe: Style, for example, articulates Wolfe's vision o
Earth and Urth. The term "baroque," which has frequentl
the publication of his brilliant "The Fifth Head been applied to his work, applies not only to language anl
of Cerberus" in 1972 earned him a place among a sentence structure of The Book, to its giantism in imager
small band of accomplished stylists in science and to its maze structure, but to the elaborate and con.
fiction, along with Samuel R. Delany, Thomas M. voluted society Wolfe describes, the abundance of charac
Disch, Joanna Russ and one or two others. The ters, most of whom undergo many variations on their basi·
completed "Book of the New Sun" establishes his stereotypes and archetypes as they develop, and the ricl
pre-eminence, pure and simple.(2) eounterpoint of themes, both speculative and philosophical
"Baroque" even suggests religion‘s role in the novel.
Baird Searles, in Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine, "Baroque“ often refers to the elaborate and th.
agrees with Jonas and adds that The Book of the New Sun convoluted; opposite to the plain, unadorned style oz
"will undoubtedly be considered a landmark in the field," Hemingwalh eften employed in science fiction, baroque Styl.
but he goes on to wonder whether, "under that glittering in science fieticn includes unusual, esoteric language anl
edifice of surprising words and more surprising events and ccmplicated, indirect——indeed, almost tortured--sentence
characters . . . [there is] a story or a concept of any Stf¤Ct¤l‘e· The tetral0gy's first chapter introduces us 1;
stature."(3) It seems clear to me that there is a story W¤lfe°S baroque language and sentence structure. Ba;-biean
though not an unccxmion one, and a number of concepts, in- gallipots, mystes, badelaire, oblesque, dholes, anschaspand
Cluding Sgyyg Very impgrtant ones. SgarlgS' question GVGITY WOKÖ is strange to the twentieth—century Gal} {Dany are
reflects a certain consternation with Wolfe's baroque and unknmm to the cormion reader, yet all are in the lexicon
indirect approach to a genre more comnonly represented by a In his appendix to the first volume, Wolfe says:
plain style and direct approach.
The plot (the story) of The Book of the New Sun is i in rendering this book——originally composed in a
straightforward and at first glance, unexceptional. A young i tongue that has not yet achieved existence——into
man is exiled from his guild but given a powerful sword and English, I might easily have saved myself a
a book that contains the secrets of life. He finds a great deal of labor by having recourse to in—
miraculous gem and goes on a quest to return it to its vented terms; in no case have I done so. Thus
rightful owners. He has many adventures along the way and in many instances I have been forced to replace
at the end of them is made king and is about to save the yet undiscovered concepts by their closest
world: a ccuing-of—age story, a guest story, an adventure twentieth—century equivalents. Such words as
story, a success story, and a save—the—world story. There Elast, andrggyn, and exultant, are substitu-
are, then, plenty of story—elements in The Book, though none tZl0¤5 of this kind, and are intended to be sug-
of them is unusual. But rarity does not give stories their Qestil/e rather than definitive. (Appendix, p.
stature——most of the great literature of the world runs on 302, ST)
such ordinary plots as love, revenge, coming of age, and _
questing. Are the stories written with graceful and power- Bus Paragraph indicates Several reasons why Wolfe chose tc
ful control, placed within a fully-realized world, acted out use °$<>t€‘FiC language thcugh it might alienate certair
by satisfying characters, made significant by their il- readers: Of: as he puts it in The Castle of the Otter,
lustration of fascinating and important ideas or concepts?
If so, the work as a whole has stature; The Book of the New $¤¤e fans seem to be able to tolerate any amount
Sun has such stature. This chapter will support the claim Of Qibberishv S0 long as it Q gibberish; but
5F—the tetralogy's value by examining its style, setting, let a hafd·W<>rking writer venture some perfectly
characterization, and themes. Each of these categories is legitimate word like epopt, and-- ....
separate from the others only through academic convention, ("WOYTÖS wéifd and Wender U , p- 26, CO)
74 75
_ ____
WOld (l)
Gerald onas of the Yew York Tines k Review wait
until the release of me Citadel o the Autarch to eview
the seies but gave it unqualified praise when the review
c, saying of lfe
the publicatim oE his brilliant ''The Fifth Head
of Ceberus'' in l972 eaned him a place arang a
ll band of acclished stylists in science
fiction, along with 5el R lany, ms m.
Disch, Joanna Russ and o o two others. me
cleted ''k Of the Mew Sun'' estalishes his
einena, p1re and sile.(2)
Baird Searles, in _Isaac Asua' v's Science Fiction Ma0azine,
agrees with JOnas and add5 that The BOOk o the w Sun
''will undoubtedly be consideed a landmark in the field,''
but he goes on to wonder whether, ''unde that glitteri
edifice of suising words and nDre suisirq events and
chaactes there isl a story or a concept o any
stature''(3) It s clear to that there is a sto
tbu9h cat an Unn and a n O COnCeptS, in-
cluding sone ve important ones, Sear3es' questìon
ref1ects a certain cansternation with lfe's bare and
indiect appaach to a genre rare nly epresented by a
plain style and dicect araach
The plot ( the story) of The Book of the Mew Sun is
staightforwad a at first glance, unexceptional, A yng
n is exiled { his ild but given a powerful sword and
a book that contains the secets of life. He finds a
miraculous gem and goes on a quest to return it to its
rightful axncrs. He has ny adventures along the way and
at the end o th is made king and is about to save the
ld a f-age story, a quest sto, an adventun
sto, a sucss story, and a save-therld etOy. men
are, then, QlentY Of StOlenentS in m_e k, th9h nO
of Rn is unusual t rarity does t give stOries their
stature-st o the great literature of the cld runs On
such ordinary plots as love, reverqe, ing Of age, and
questing ke the stoies written with gaceul and r-
ful ntrol, pla within a fully-realized r3d, acted t
by satisfing chaacters, made significant ei ilm
lustration of fascinating ard irtant ideas or ncepts1
I so, the rk ae a hole has stature; me Of the w
Sun has 6uch stature mis apte will_surt the claim
o the tetralogy' value by examining its style, setting,
aracterizatim, and ths Each o these categories is
separate f the othen mly thrh aca ic conventim,
74

_ _ _
f cse, and each will be discussed separately with th
constant acknledgTnent that it exists tO eman the Othe
elents OE the bOOk and tO help o a lex and unifi
rk
Style, O example, articulates Wolfe's vision O
fth and Urth me te ''baoque,'' which has fequentl
n applied to his rk, applies not only to language an
nten stctue of me k, to its giantism in image
and to its ma2e stuctuce, but to the elaboate and OOn
voluted sOciety Olfe descris, the abundan of charac
ters, most Of wh Om undecgO ny variations on their basi
stefeotypeS and afChetYpeS aS they deVelO and the iCJ
anteint oE ths, th speculative and philophical
re'' even suggests religion's role in the novel
BaOque'' Often ees to the elabOrate and th
convoluted; OppOsite tO the plain, unadoned style O
Hiqway, often employed in scien iction, baroque styl
in SClence flCtl On nClUdeS UnUSUal, e50teriC lan9ua9e an
licated 1nd1CeCt--lndeed, almOSt tOrtUred-'SentenCl
stctue, me tetaly's fist apter introduces us t
lfe's bare language and sentence stn1cture 8arbican
gallipots, ystes, badelaie, olesque, dholes, an6chaspand
every rd is strange to the twentiethentury ea, ny ar
unkn to the n reade, yet all a in the lexi
In his andix to the first volune, lfe says;
in rendering this k-iginally ed in a
tongue that has not yet achieved existence--intO
En9lish, I mi9ht eaSily haVe SaVed mySelf a
great deal of 3abor by having rease to in-
vented tenT6; in no Case have I do so mus
in ny instances I have en forced to replace
yet undiscoveed concepts by thei clOsest
twentieth-centuy equivalents, Such rds as
la t, ard0 n, and exultant , are 5ubstitu-
tims of this ind, and_are intended tO sug-
9eStiVe rathe than deEintiVe ApendlX,
302, ST)
mis paragraph indicates seveal easons why lfe chase tc
Ute esOteric language though it might alienate cectai
O, aS he putS it in _me CaStle Of the ter,
sare Eans sm to be le to toleate any nt
Of 9ibberi5h, SO lOn9 as it iS 9ibi Shi bUt
let a harki writer venture saTe perfectly
legitimate word like eo0t, and--
( ''WOrd9 Meird and er u, p 26
75

First of all, the use of esoteric words rather than made-up · _
ones forges a link between the tetralogy's Urth and our égiifetnliojäljasiiäid säom Verl) lremalne) bl! a l<
world, while at the same time conveying "the flavor of an ne uthat Seeed befege gjlahl lq‘at¥onS' Which gate?
odd place at an odd time" ("Words Weird and Wonderful", p. O. f „_ h t US ’ ow old lt Stand? wlth wlSPS
26, CO). The words are peculiar, yes, but they belong to rläeälh ige; ws} was that feg oolnga °°tnFeadlnQ 1tS Spike
our culture. Second, the use of words from the past to in- in ee See Sävedag actlon llke? muntalp pathsß Tne S‘
dicate future concepts reminds us not only that Severian's k en . n,S l t rom a gate to a mountaan Path: dupllcat
Urth in some ways resembles our Earth of the distant past ~/[ Sevgma S a er traVelS' before retnfnlnäl te 1tS a¤ChOf
with its terminology and conventions based on Rcxuan legions Yet ’ ast elämiä eventtlally returns to Nesaus: Bavaria
and medieval castles, but that time in these books is not gääiniléntäneeeth rgne Yllll be no more Stl‘al9nttOFWafd·
strictly linear. Past words convey future concepts in a Comes a S I l_ enosg, ls _altoreo_ by a S1mlle,_ the gate.}
world where the author can translate works "surviving so ll becomes SU ’ t. mg is pemlttoo no remaln detlnltf
many centuries of futurity" (Appendix, p. 303, ST), where äh. h l . ggis We' E last Sentence Of the Patagtal
the novels' characters can search for one another up and lc exp ama t 8 .why Of what has gone b@f¤r@, leaVeS
down corridors of time, where the protagonist can also exist nävirtälelesa ' aSk%¤¤· Ylnan Swim? What tO1't¤f<
as his own ancestor. Third, invented terms would refer ex- ff S roänänß Tlme la fgaln dlSJOlnted* “naVe begnl
clusively and specifically to Wolfe's invented concepts a ;€¤;aih’ had drown9o' Md the Qrvcial, most act:
whereas his speculation and vision are meant to be gigwngd ,, äs S§n\;;€§C§' thsugn not tne lndependent O¤e, "I
"suggestive rather than definitive." Fourth, Wolfe's real th lr; eh a 9 OK e fand of tne SentenCe·_ Werk:
words suggest a broad knowledge——of military history, rough 8 Sentence la llke followlng a monntaln Path
weaponry, architecture, pharmacy, alchemy, zoology, ccmpara- IEaZ€° E es Sente“C€' tlfploal of the bar¤q¤@ Se¤te¤Ce Stu
tive religion, and of course, torture—-which gives the um O 8 nOVelS’ though gra“‘“atloallY ln Petteet C¤¤tf<
tetralogy a feeling of depth, solidity, vastness, and ccm- ääärarliii not tqnlli to present Information nn'; te ÖUPUCE
plexity rar beyond its sheer bulk of pages. such a feeling, · the §OnvO§;"Q£nSSOg°V€“eY· whlch IS made Cmplex mt <>¤ly
of nuch going on at once, and in an aesthetically and logi- Of the travelefs gd?) Qutward events but bY tno btanenlr
cally satisfying way, is at the heart of the baroque. eeveria _ pr lgtousf n"an‘ol”leS· _ _ ·
Sentence structure functions in 'Ihe Book of the New forget nothilg S li mdeed prodlglous: ll? Claims
gig much as its language does, not to obfuscate but to il- Citadel . h.gr; UC, O thla Urtn ls P¤°ed1g1¤US· 'I
lustrate. Again, let the tetralogy's first chapter 1 hm w IC Sovorlan nae llVeÖ nle whole life 100::6
exemlify: arge t at he keepslcoming upon corridors he has never se
before. Somewhere .1n that Citadel, and extending a va
It is possible I already had some presentiment dtstance k?ey°no' l_S a nnge llbfafl/ Outside the Citac
of my future. The locked and rusted gate that 1195 the glgantlc CRY of Nesane and tntengn it flows t
Seeed before ue, with wieps ef river feg threed_ vast river Gyoll. Somewhere outside the gates of Nesst
ing its Spikes like the mountain Dame, remeine the armies of the Comnonwealth and of its enemy, the A
in my mind new es the Symbol ef my exile_ That CIGHS, flow endlessly into battle in hundreds of thousanc
is why I have begun this account Of it with the Severian meets the giant Baldanders and the two—headed gia
aftermath of our swim, in which I, the ;Yphon He Sealee Qlgantie meuntains carved with monstrq
torturer's apprentice Severian, had so nearly d;gUr,€S' lt la all Vel'Y Well te Sa}! that the land Wol
drowned. (Ch. 1, p. 9, ST) _ Seribes must be South America, since several clues tell
lt is south of the equator, that it has a broad pamp
'I‘hough the first sentence is fairly short (eleven words), it rgratnoatnan e Plaln er eutback or veldt), that its nativ
nevertheless proceeds from present tense (is) to past (had) äve skin that is dark but not black, and so on. B.1t the
and ends with the word "future," showing us that time will ähuoar thaggh the}! Cemeet Earth to Ufth, alSO remind US,
not be linear in the tetralogy. The two remaining sentences „ G oooterle language dOeS, that the world of the novels
are xmch longer (thirty—two words and twenty—seven words). tn ooo PlaCe_et_ an Odd time" Wolfe's repeated use
In the first of these two longer sentences, the subject älantlsm ln hle lmageFY le¤dS Oddness to his Urth. And li
Oää use of peculiar vocabullary, these images function
76 er ways as well. They fit the scale of the tetralog
77
_
First Of all, the use of esoteic cds rathe than dep
Ones foges a link between the tetalogy's Ucth a our
ld, while at the s tine conveying ''the lavor of an
Odd place at an odd ti'' ( ''rds Meird a nderful'', p.
26, ) me ds ae pecuia, yes, but they long to
alr culture, nd, the use of wOrds f the past to in-
dicate futue conts reminds us n3t mly that Severian's
Urth in s ways eseTnbles r Earth o the distant past
with its teil and cmventions based on Ranan legions
and ieval castles, but that tine in these ks is not
strictly linea Past words convey futue ncepts in a
rld whee the authoc can tcanslate woks ''suviving so
many centuies o futurity'' (Appendix, p. 303, ST}, where
the novels ' characters can seach fo orR anothe up and
dmn cOridors Of tine, whee the pcOtagonist can also exist
as his mn ancestor. mird, invented tenc6 wld refer ex-
clusively and speciEically to Molfe's invented concepts
wheeas his speculation ard visim ae meant to be
''suggestive athe than Einiti'' Fouth, lfe's eal
wods suggest a bcoad knowledge--of milita histoy,
aponry, architectue, phacy, alch, 2loy, ra-
tive eligion, and of couse, tOrtue--which gives the
tetralogy a feeli of depth, solidity, vastness, and c-
plexity far bey its sh bulk of pages Sch a fling,
o{ ch goirq on at once, and in an aesthetiully and logi-
cally satisfyi way, is at the heat OE the bae
Sentence structure functions in me k o the h3ew
Sun ch as its language ds, n Ot tO Obfuscate but to il-
lustrate, Again, let the tetalOgy's first chapter
exl i fy
Tt is sible T already had pesentine nt
of nv future me locked a nlsted gate that
stood befoe us, wi wisps Of river f thead-
ing its spikes like the nt3in paths, ins
in nd nm as the sl Of y exile mat
is why I n this acant O{ it wi the
aftermath of ou swim, in wh ich I, the
touer's apprenti Severian had sO nearly
dr ( l, p 9, ST)
mgh the fist senten is {airly shO (eleven nds), it
heless prs f present tense (is) to past (
and ends with the rd ''future," shmirq us that tine will
t lir in the tetal, me t rining sentences
an nu l Oqer (thirty-t nds a tntyven rds
In the f3t OE theSe tWO lOn9e SentenCeS t the tUbeCt
76

_
(gate) is separated Om the verb (remains) by a l
(sixteen wO ) string O{ qualjfications. Which gate?
one ''that st OOd be fOre us''; h m did it stand7 ''wi th wisps
river f''i what was that Og dOing? ''threading its spike
and at was th at acti On like? '' ntain Pa ths'' m e s
tence has v fr a gate to a untain path, duplicat
eveian's later travel5, be fore ceturni q tO its anch Or
verb, as Se verian eventually returns to Yessus: Se veria
J'ourney tO the thme will no rare straightfOrwad.
this sentence the f is altered by a simile, the gate
s a s li nOthir3g is itted to reTnain definiti'
ell bec s suggestive. me last senten Of the paagraJ
ich explains the wh y of at has gone fore, leaves
nevertheless in aia res, a5king, what swim? what tour
what drowning? Time is again disjointed: ''have begu3
"ate nna th,'' ''had df mn ed'' An d the crucial, mOst act:
verb of the sentence, though t the indepe ndent one, ''t
dr amed ,'' is saved f Or the end o the sentence. MOk:
through the sentence is like {ollowing a Ia ntain pa th
ze. me sentence, typical of the bar oqu e sentence stn
ture of e novels, though gr tically in pe rfect contrc
opeates nOt Only tO present ino nna tion but tO duplic  
the potagonist's j m y, Wh ich is de c anp lex not only
the convolutions of itsoutward events but by the banchir
of the traveler's p Od igi s ries.
Severian's ne nD is indeed pigious he clai
forget nothing. much of this Uth is prodigi Ous 1
Citadel in which Severian has liv ed his whole lie l
lar ge that he keeps i ng u po n co rridors he has never s
bef Ore. SaTe Whee in that Citadel, and extending a v  
di5tance beyond, is a huge libra, Outside the Citac
lies the gigantic city of Messue and through it flows t
vast river Gyoll So Where outside the gates Of Yess
Ule aies of the nwealth and of its enemy, the
cians, El endlessly into ba ttle in hundr ed s of th sanc
verian nBe ts th e giant Ba ldande rs and th e t -head gi  
On. He scales gigantic untains ca rved wi ra trc
figures It is all very well to say that the lard I
sci be s nu st be S th hTe rica, sin ce several clues tell
it is s Outh of the equator, that it has a brOad pamE
(ra er th an a plain o t ba ck or ve ldt), at its na ti
have skin that i5 dark but not black, and sO on. t th
clues, though they comect Eah to Uh, also remind us,
,,e eteric language ds, that the wold o the novels
an Odd place at an odd time.'' Molfe's repeated use
9lanti in his ige lerds oddness to his Uth. li
hiS use of peculia vocabulay, these iges function
Oer ways as well. mey fit the scale of the tetrala.
77

Four volumes, 1222 pages in the first editions, all to I , , , ,
produce what Severian Surprises us by deSCribi¤g 65 "this bring with them reminders of their earlier appearances in
tOO—·brjef account of a summer HDKQ than ¤O!T“ällY turbulemln SeVeL‘iä|’l'$ llfe, SO that we are conscious 0f how Severian
(Ch, 37, p, 308, CA). The prodigiousnese of the iTTlöQ€S himS6lf has Chä|"lQ9Ö Vjle have a true sense of their running
matches the scale of Severian's memory. The vastnessot the _ through corridors of time, as some of them are described as
artifacts of Severian's time also reflects the vast distance doing, because they dodge in and out of our memories in a
of "so many centuries of futurity-" _ similar fashion as we read.
If, in the baroque era, Versailles‘ SCäl@ femlnded The effect oflall these recurrences of people, sym-
pegple gt the huge gulf separating the rUlerS frem those bols,. and lmages is similar to the effects of similar
they ruled, then in Severian's era, the huge scale, of the repetitions in the Labyrinths of Borges. The Book of the
House Absolute can serve as a similar reminder: size and New Sun builds labyrinths of words, images, and ideas just
political power am Connected in many of the tetral0gy‘s as its protagon1st follows a labyrinthine path to the
images of giantism. If, in the baroque era, the vastness of Pelerines, to the autarchy, to the New Sun. As we follow
St. Peter's Basilica reminded people of their position in the mazes, we look for more clues, more recurrences, search-
the cosmos, the sheer giantism of such natural phenomena as ing for the patterns which will lead us to meaning. And
the River Gyoll and the broad pampas serve öl Similar f¤¤C‘ each ClIl'l€.W€ flnd another appearance of Agia, another rose,
tion in Severian's time. Size serves in Severian's age as another giant, we feel echoes from our past with the novel,
it did in the baroque——to emphasize the gulf between ord1— as Severian the memorious (who shares his talent for remem-
nary human beings and the seats of power, both DO]-1*11Cal and bering w1th Borges' "funes the Memorious") feels eohoes,
spiritual. The giantism of such artificial constructs as reminders, reverberationsfrom his past at each stage of his
Typhon's carved mountain attempts to prove humanity s journey. Severian describes his personality, once it con-
ability to control nature, a desire sympathetic with the tains not onlylhis memories and Thecla's, but those of the
Control over natural forces sought in that far eafllef Autarch "Who 1n one body is a thousand" (Ch, 27, p, 224,
baroque tirre. _ CA), in this way.
But there is another kind of vastness, that of multi- v ,
plicity, which operates in The Book's imagery and to which The old, simple structure of my single per-
the term "baroque" applies. The hordes of armies, the num- sonality was no more; but the new, complex
bers of cacogens, the kinds of genetically engineered structure no longer dazzled and bewildered me.
animals, the variety of cultures, and of customs and guilds It,was a maze, but I was the owner and even the
within Severian's culture, all woven together into these builder of that maze. (Ch. 30, pp, 242-243, Qi)
four volumes, form a complex unity like the contrapuntal ·
forms of baroque music or like the topiary mazes of which Severian's memoriousness forms a maze; so does the multi-
baroque palace—builders were fO¤d· _ pliclty of his rremories. _The fictive writing of this four-
Images of giantism are not the only repeated, images of volume memoir puts him in possession of the labyrinths of
the novels; gates, oaves, roses, claws, Cähhlböllämr Simsr h1S memory, and Severian feels similar control over the maze
light and shadow, the colors black, white, and red appear of his personality. , l
again and again. They are all symbols of life, death, and Another kind of Borgesian maze recurs in The Book:
rebirth, often with Christian associations, lreminding us of the embedded story. Such stories include not just
the novels' thematic concerns at the same time their recur- Severian's dreams and Thecla's embedded memories, and the
rence leads us down pattern—forming paths, as if we followed appendices that accompany each volume, but seven self-
a maze, The baroque multiplicity of päths léads U5_ ln Cehtained stories. The tetralogy's second volume (Volume
various wayS to the center, the core of the novels' meanlhg, One contains no stories of this kind) holds two tales: "The
though we Cannot always see where we are headed Of *20 What· Tale of the Student and His Son" (Ch. 17), which Severian
Other symbols and images recur in the tetralogy. Characters reads fran 'I‘hecla's brown book to comfort his injured friend
appear, djeappear, reappear again: Agia, Trläkelér Master JGTBS; and "Dr. Talos‘s Play: Eschatology and Genesis" (Ch,
Malrubius, Rudesind, the Green Man, Dr. Talos. They carry 24), which the company perforus at the House Absolute.
with them, in their eemings and goings, threads of Diet: SO Velume Three contains just one intercalated story, "The Tale
that eventually all are woven into G complex taP€St7-”Y They 0f_\lhe Boy Called Frog" (Ch. 19), again frqn the brown book,
this time read by Severian to comfort little Severian.
78
79
_
Our vOlumes, l222 pages in the fist editiOns, all to
pr0duce what Severian sumrises us by descibi q as ''this
t 0o -brief account of a s r ra re than no nTa ly tubulent"
(Ch 37, p. 308, CA) The prodigiOusness Of the images
tches the scale of Severian's me vastness o the
artifacts of Severian's tinB also reflects the vast distan
of ''so ny centuries of futuity''
I, in the bar Oq ue era, Versailles' scale reminded
ople Of the huge gulf separating the rulers fom those
they nled, then in Severian's era, the huge scale of the
Hse Absoute can senFe as a similar reminder size and
political power ae connected in many of the tetal 's
images of giantism, If, in the bar o0 e ea, the vastness o
St Peter's Basilica eminded people Of their pOsiti On in
the a ra s, the sheer giantism of such natural phen na as
the River Gyoll and the broad s serve a simila func-
tion in Severian's tine Si2e senFes in Seveian's age as
it did in the ba r e--to asize the gul{ be tween ordi
na h n be i rq s and the seats of r, bO th po litical a nd
spiritual, The giantism of such artificial constcts as
Ty phon's caved mountain attempts tO prOve humanity's
ability to control nature, a desire s yTnp athetic vith the
cOntrOl over natural forces sought in that far earlie
bar e ti
t th ere is anotner kind o vastness, th at of multi*
plicity, which o pe rates in m e k's i ge a nd to ich
the te ''bar oqu e'' applies m e hordes o{ a ies, the n Lm -
be n o cacogens, the kinds of genetically engineered
animals, the variety of cultues, and Of cust and,guilds
within verian's culture, all woven t og ethe into these
four volumes, fo a complex unity like the ntrapu ntal
fo rn6 of bar oqu e sic or like the topia mazes of which
ba r e pa lacebuilders were fond
Tge o giantism are not the only repeated iges of
the vels; gates, caves, roses, claws, cannibalism, suns,
light and shadm , e los black, white, a nd ed appear
again and again m ey ae all s ls of life, a th, a nd
ebirth, often with Chrit=an as iatiO ns, emi nd i q us Of
e ravels' th tic ncems at the s ane ti their ecur-
ren leads us d am patten-foing paths, as if we foll a3ed
a ma ze The baroque multiplicity of paths leads us in
vai s ways to the nter, th e co re of e vels' ne aning,
th oug h m cant always s Where we are headed or to What
Other s s and iges ecu in the tetal racters
ap pe ar, disap a, eap ar again: Ag ia, iskele, Mas ter
lbiUS, RUdesind, the Geen Man, Tal meY car
with , in their cings and goings, reads of plot,
that eventually all are ven into a lex ta pe st . m ey
78

_ __
bring with them reminders o thei ealier appeaances in
verian's life, so at we ae cOnscious of h Severian
h' elf has changed. We have a true sense of eir nInniq
rgh cOrridOrs Of ti, as saTe of them ae descri as
iq, because they in and t of our nenaries in a
silar fashi On as read,
me effect of all these recurences of people, sym-
bols, and images is similar to the effects ot similar
titions in the ' th of Borges. The k of the
w Sun builds lrinths of words , iges, and ideas just
as its prOtagOnist fOllows a labyrinthine path to the
pelerines, to the autarchy, to the Mew Sun. k we follax
the zes , we lOOk fO rrDre clues, ce recurrenas, search-
ing fo e patterns which will lead us to meaning. And
each tine find ather appeaance of Agia, another rose,
anothe giant, e feel echs r past wi the vel,
as 5everian the rious (whO shares his talent for rm-
ring with Borges' ''Funes the emorious'') feels echoes,
inders, reverberations fr his past at each stage o his
jy verian describes his personality, once it con-
tains nOt Only his ries and mecla's, but those of the
Autar ''who in one body is a thousand'' (Ch. 27, p, 224,
CA), in this way
The old, simple structure of my single per-
sonality was moe; but the new, complex
structue longer dazzled and bewildered me
It was a ze, but I was e r and even the
builder of that naze (Ch 30, 242-243, CA)
I
Severian's memoriousness forn6 a e; 5o ds the lti-
plicity of his ies me fictive wTitiq o{ this fou-
vOlu memoi puts him in session of the lainths Of
his , a Severian fls simila contrOl over the ze
Of his rsmality.
Another kind o gesian maze ecus in The Book
the embedded story Such stories include not just
verian's dn and mecla's edded memories, and the
appendices that accompany each volwne, but seven self-
cOntai stoies me tetal's second vOlume (VOlu
One contaiM no stories of is ki) holds two tales ''me
T8le of e Student and His Sm" (Ch l7), ich verian
ads r mecla'9 brmn k to o his injured Eiend
s; and ''. Tal's Play: atol and sis'' (Ch
24), which the company perfo at the House Absolute
VOl mree ntains Just one intecalated stO, ''me Tale
Of e Called Fr" (Ch l9), again fr the brmn k,
this time read by Severian to canfOrt little Severian.
79

Volume Four contains the most stories, four tales told in a
contest to win Foila's hand. The stories are "Hallvard‘s the jhhgler ef the meuhtein paths, of the flgatln isle d
story--The Two 5ealers“ (Ch. 7), "Melito's Story-The Cock, eeeh haVe their ewn culture within the Cemmenweaglth {ITS,
the Angel, and the Eagle (Ch. 9), "Loyal to the Group of ihhumeteble Aeeiehe have their own Cultures as well ' b {le
5eVenteens Story--The Just man" (Ch. ll), and, an unex— liahtlY ehqgested by "Loyal to the Greup Of Sevegt mr
pectgd twist, "Foila's Story--The Armiger's Daughtef" (Ch- St°tY‘“°The Just Mah" (Ch- ll, CA). All these Cultur een S
Because I have discussed at length Wolfe's use of the befeque future Wolfe has j_maglned_ og { G
embedded story elsewhere (see the chapters on The Fifth Head This future Urth thou ‘ . .
ef Cerberus and Peace), here I wish only to mention how with Ohr Earth, else IpeeeeggeetaSgegäihgeggräägec baslcs
these embedded stories form another kind of figurative maze feat¤Fe5= huge mountains layered with human n t {Sal new
in the tetralogy. when we fall into one of these stories, histel-“Y7 vaet ¢öVeI°hS formed by ancient Cities Eudgeo sglc
it seems to be leading us away from the main path, but when Systems; the marvelous floatlng lelauds. the 1;:1 Wag
we clamber Out at the end of the story, we find that it has rente Of the I‘iVel’S· The people of Urth tem Vggygus Cur
actually led us further on by a circuitous route. In baeed on caste or geography. The animals around th races
tevealing the character of the teller and his or her Cul- qhlte Changed frem those of Earth, due te genetlc en im am
ture, in its reiteration of the tetralogy‘s major symbols ing and extra-terrestrial imports but the a g neer—
(such as the maze in "The Tale of the Student and His Son") WOlfe°S beteque vision of Urth is met eml iy re many'
and themes (such as the value of simplicity and honesty in diverse GS well. y mmenS€’ but
Foila's story), each story moves us deeper toward the center Ahe not only diverse, but : , -
of the maze, It does so in a non—linear way, replicating et Cha!'e¢te¤°iZetion is especiallgmtlgjärapygégi Smzandllng
the non—linear vision of time by which The Book OperateS like, dYhamiC and Compelling, The Char-actersab {Haze-
Figurative mazes are echoed by architectural ones in Ste'~°eOtYDe$ öhd örchetypes, but these t es äglnlas
The Book: the Citadel, the library, the botanical garden, 9tad¤allY ehe Surprisingly into traneformé/Ä) Vereäve O?
the House Absolute, the dungeons beneath it, the cave of the these tYPeS· These evolving types Change seem te eägs O
man—apes, the walled city of Thrax, and so on and on. This FeVeal unehanged Selves in Changing ways SO that nge'
is hut one way that setting confirms style and directs us to evehletiehe ef them keep changing as well we foll lour
theme in the tetralogy. If the style of these novels may be as the ehataeters appear and reappegr tnroughätc EE;
equated with the baroque, so may the setting. Wolfe Says, ;’l‘E;L;‘eS· hew he 1-S good, now evil; now ehe le right, new
for years before I began reading sf . . ., I had _ Vodalus is a Chöfäetef Who reveals hle, unchan ed Self
been following Flash Gordon's adventures on the }h ehehgihg WaYS· His first appearanee drawin häs
imnense planet Mongo; and as a result I Was Of- ih the QT-'aVeYa!'Ö ät night to protect a heautigu? wqueswotd
ten irritated (as I still am) when I discovered I 9la¤¤¤¤>¤S ehe myeterious. Seen thteugh Severianls e eg' gs
a writer assuming a single, simple, uniform cul- le heroic: the type of the noble Outlaw fighein B; aänsä
ture covering an entire world .... I find this eppression. In Volume Two, Severian has the l;-in gt
both incredible and boring (a poor but only too See the ¤·‘thle$SheSS of Vodalus' rrßthodg änd tgpzgelugä ytäo
pO55j_b]_Q Cgmbjjlaigign), I wanted [O shgg an en- qhlallty of his followers: OUt].aW, y€S**bUC noble note e
tire society: one I could attempt to make tl°“letlY· BY Velume Three, Severian has forsakenrhig wie
plausibly complex. ("Helioscope," pp. 8-9, CO) öhd the Past it represents; he must, then, reject thegäget
. l l edalus wants lto recall. And by Volume Four, we see Vodalus
His orchestration of the various cultures and subcultures öS noble again, at least in comparison to A ia th h
that make up the Conmonwealth and Ascians of Urth iS a een- wr°hg Agia: bY the Way, is the most static gqe;-eeteoug
trapuntal, a baroque exercise. We learn that the Common- the book, though she dons many masks. Ruled by re en r in
weath has a caste system, each caste with its own culture, tetaihs a consistent measure ef hetred forve ge' ae
and that it has a number of guilds, each with its own Socie- thrwgigaeut the tetralogy. everlan
tal structure. We find that the people of the pampas, of _ ldanders seens te cha .
the cities of Nessus and Thrax and the village of Saltus, of gleht Of Volume one te the ngieläggnbmhte egilällséd fjgläg
80 l elume 'Iwo to the brilliant and dangerous one of Volume
7 8l
__ _ __
Vol Four contains the t stories, four tales told in a
contest to win Foila's hand, me stories an "Hallvard's
Sto--me Sealers'' (Ch 7), ''melito 's StoryTe Ck,
the Angel, and the Eagle (Ch. 9) , ''yal tO the GrOup of
Seventn's Stome Just man'' (Ch ll), and, an unex-
ected twist, ''Foila's Storyme Anni'ge's Daughter'' (Ch.
l3).
Because I have discussed at length lfe's use o- the
edded story elsewhere (s the chapters on Te FifM Head
of Cerberus and Peace ), here I wish only to mention how
these edded stOie O another kind of figurative naze
in the tetral. Mhen m fall into me o these stories,
it seeTTG to leading us away fr the main path, but wen
we clr out at the erd of the sto, we find that it has
actually led us further m by a circuitow route, n
evealing the aacte of the teller and his o her cul-
ture, in jts reiteration of the tetral's 3or sls
(such as the na2e in ''me Tale f the Student and His Son'')
and thenRs (such as the value o silicity and honesty in
Foila's stoy), each story ves us deeper tard the nnter
of the ze It ds so in a non-linear way, replicati
the non-linea vi.sion of ti by whi me k ates,
Figurative naes are echoed by architectural Ones in
me k e Citadel, the libra, the botanical garden,
the HOuse Absolute, the dungeons beneath it, the cave of the
n-apes, e walled city of mrax, and so on and on mis
is but One way that setti confinns style and directs us to
th in the tetralt If the style of these vels y be
ated with the bae, so may the setting. Molfe says,
for years before I gan eading sf t, I had
en {olling Flash Gordm's adventues m the
inne' nse planet ; and as a result was of-
ten icritated (as I still an) en I discoveed
a iter assi a sin9le, sile, unifo cul-
ture coverirq an entire world,. . I ind this
bOth incredible a boring (a r but only t
sible inatim) I wanted to sh an en
tire society: one I could attempt to make
laUSblY leX (''Heli'' t 8'9, )
HiS oestration of e varis cultureS and subcultures
that make up the alth and cians Of Urth is a con-
trapuntal, a bar exercise m lean that the Cn-
weath has a caste system, ea caste with its mn culture,
and that it has a nr of ilds, ea with its mn ie-
tal structure fi that the le of e s, o{
the cities of Messus and mrax and e village Of Saltus, of
8O

e jurqle, o e rauntain paths, of the Elting islands,
ea have their mn culture within the Commonwealth, The
imable Ascian have thei axn cultues as ll, bril
li'antly sugge5t by ''LOYal to the Group of Seventeen's
stoy--me Just n'' (Ch ll, CA). All the5e cultures,
different fr me another, nevertheles5 fo tether the
e future Wolfe ha ' gined
mis utue Urth, though it share geographic basic5
with our Earth, alO pOssesses a wealth of divese new
Eeatures huge ntains layeed with hn, not geolic
history; vast caverns fOrned y ancient cities and subway
systems; the marvelOus flaating i53ands; the lex cur-
rents of the riven me ple o Urth o various as
s on caste O geagraphy. me anils around them are
0ite charqed the Of Eacth, due to genetic engneer-
ing and extra-terestial imports, but they are many
lfe's barOque visi On Of Uth is not only immense, but
divese as well
d not Only diverse, but clex: Wolfe's handliq
of characteri2atim is especially contrapuntal and maze-
like, dynamic and compelling, The chaacters begin as
steceotypes and achetypes, but these types develop
gradually and surprisingly into tansfomed versions Of
the types mese evolving types change, sm to ange,
reveal unchanged selves in changing way so that Oau
evaluatior3s of keep charqiq as well Me follm clues
as the characters appear and reappea thoughout the
vols: he is g, evil; n 5he is right, na3
Valus is a aracter who reveals his unchanged sel{
in changing ways His fist appeaance, drawing his srd
in the graveyard at night to potect a Deautiful n is
glaams a teis n through verian'5 eyes, he
is heroic: the type of the noble outlaw, fightin against
pression In Vol , Seveian h the tnitY tO
the lessss o Vlus ' ods   nd  to evaluate the
lity of his follmers: tlaw, yesbut nob3e, not par-
ticularly. Vol mree, Severian has orsaken his ild
a e past it epesen; he st, en, ject e past
Vlus wants to ecall. Vol Fr, s Valus
noble again, a least in canparism tO Agia, thOugh
wraq ia, e way, is the nDst static character in
e k, th  she doM y ks Ruled venge, she
etains a congistent measure of hatred for Severian
t the tetral
B8ldanden s to charqe, fan the ntle, slavish
9iant o Vol O to the violent but confused O Of
VOl to the brilli8nt and dangerous one Of VOlume
8l

I
having done this, having experienced the life Of a Weman ana dyihg, "she seemed a flower too long blown" (Ch. 28, pp,
a client, Severian‘s view of women and of his career is alr 267-253, cc). Only then,
tered. He is still capable of sexism and cruelty——the
change is not sudden or complete——but it does begin: he is when desire had fled and I could only look at
ho longer devoted to V0daluS‘ quest for the past, he ex~ Jolenta with pity, I found that though I had
periences slight guilt after killing a man ("I could not es- believed I cared only for her importunate, rose-
cape the eerie feeling that he was in some sense watching flushed flesh and the awkward grace of her move-
me, the man who had killed him to save himself," Ch- 13, p. ments, I loved her. (Ch. 28, p. 269, CC)
109, CC), he begins to recognize the evil of his profession,
And he begins to understand mere eOn‘Pee$iOneteiY the kinship He can love the human being, not the object, and, more im-
of love and desire in his relationships with women, under- pertantly, he understands the difference.
standing at the same time that his view of the feminine while Severian knows Jolenta for only a short time,
ideal is not the real woman. Thecla, wh0 makes Severian however, Dorcas appears in every volume of Severian's jour-
both male and female, catalyzes his enlightenment, makes him ney, Dorcas becomes the most fully human to him of all the
receptive to it when events and Deeple present him with en- female characters and therefore the most deeply loved of all
lightening information. the women he meets. Dorcas is the recipient of Severian's
Jolenta, who Single—mindedlY Yet YnintileSSiY Oozee Sex. first miracle with the Claw: until she touched Severian's
seerrs an unlikely Candidate te raise SeVei“ian°S C°nS¢i°U$‘ hand in the lake of the Garden of Endless Sleep, she had
ness, but his examination of his reactions to her in Volume peen lyihg dead heheath the lekeve emhelmind water. She
Twc teaches him much about the difference between wemen öS Saves Severian from drowning, he brings her back to life;
Objects and women as autonomous individuels _AlthO¤Qh they begin on equal footing despite Severian's still-
Jolenta began as an Ordinari/I rather Plain weitteee in inmature, initial perception of Dorcas as a frail and con-
Volume One, Dr. TalOS has tfansfeinned her inte an incredlbly fused child—w¤nan. Though he and Dorcas are soon separated
voluptuous, sexual, and sensnal eafieetnfe et waren es eeX‘ at the gate of Nessus, he realizes that she is already "more
Object, She is now an artificial CO¤stfUCt: the real Wtnnen than a lover, a true companion" (Ch. 35, p. 295, ST). He is
cqnpletely buried by the perfumed flesh· A man (an a!‘tifi‘ capable of this realization even before Thecla's memory
cial construct himself) has made her literally into what men opens him to androoyny, put aftemard he is further opened
have often attempted to make women- She is a kind °t not only to Dorcas's companionship but to her protection: I
monster of desire, and, when she and Severian couple lin the want ro protect Yon ffm the Opinion Of the world',. She Says
garden of the House of Absolute, SeV€I'1an°S Keactlon 1S (Ch. 22, p, 199, CC)_ She helps him understand that he Can
monstrous: change, that he need not symbolize death in his torturer's
habit:
Jolenta's desire was no more than the desire to
be desired, so that I wished, not to comfort her To me yod·re Life, and yod·re a yodno mn named
lgneliness . . , nor to find eXP!'eS$l9n fer an Severian, and if you wanted to , . , become a
aching love.   , n<>t to Pmteet her ·  · r Carpenter or a fisherman, no one could stop you.
hat to shame and punish her, to destroy her (Ch. 22, p, 200, CC)
self~possession, to fill her eyes with tears and
tear her hair as one burns the hair of corpses No one else but Dorcas understands his potential for change,
to torment the ghosts who have fled them. (Ch. for enlightenment. Only she can allow the possible progres-
13, p. 207, CC) p sion of meanings for Severian's name--frcm severe to sever
· to savior. Only she who "had been my counselor in
He recognizes, then, that a being which exists °nlY as a eex Pefplexity and my comrade in a hundred desert places" can
object is ¤<> mre real ¤r 1<>vebie than a ¢<>tPee fm "'*“°*‘ Pmvide "moral she1ter·· for Severian (ch. 1, p. 14, sr,).
the soul has fled. I Dorcas helps him understand the relationship between Dr.
But without Dr- Tal0S to ref¤rb1S¤_h<·=r· J°l°nta Tales and Baldanders, the nature of the Claw's action, and
dctcrigrates, the opulent flesh „SOft€n€d like waxn unt1l' the meaning Of true frigndghip in which each pcrgch helps
84 and accepts help from the other.
85
E3avi do this, havirq experienced the lite o{ a n a
a client, verian's view Of n and Of his caree is al
teed Ye is still caable O{ sexism and cruelty-the
change is nOt sUdden 0r lete-ut it s begin he i's
no longer devOted tO Valus' est Eo the past, he ex
peience5 slight guilt ater killing a n ( ''I ald t es
caee the eerie flin9 at he was in s Ome sense watchin
, the man whO had killed him tO save hin6el,'' Ch. l3, p.
109, CC), he ins tO reize the evil o his proEessi.
And he begins to unde5tand ra ssiOnatel the kiMhi'
oE love and desire in his relati Onshi with n, unr
standing at the sane tine that his view of e fnine
ideal is t the real n Thecla, whO makes Severian
both le and female catalYzes his enlightent, makes hi
receptive to it en events and peOple present him with en-
lightening inotim.
olenta, who iqleinl yet mindlessly es 8ex,
seerr6 an unlikel candidate tO aise veian's ascis-
ness, but his exination of his nactiOns to her in Vol
teaches him ch about the diference betn n
objects and wanen as autonomous individuals Although
olenta began as an ordinary, rathe plain aitress in
Vol 0ne, Talos has transfO her into an incredibly
luptus, sexual, and ersual caricatun of n sex-
object She is nm an artificial tct, the al n
etely buried by the perf flesh. A man (an akifi-
cial astct h' el{ 3 has Iade her literally intO what nen
have oten attempted to make wOmen She îs a kird of
te o desire, and, when she and everian mple in e
gaden Of the HOuse of AbSOlute, SeVeran'S eaCti S
nstrous:
Jolenta's si was no e an the si to
be desi, so tha T wihI t tO O her
lliss.., no to i expre69ion for an
achi le , t tO prOtect her .,
but to shame and punis her, tO destr Oy her
selfsession, to fill her eYes wi tean and
tear he hair ag orR burns e hai O s
to tont the ghts O fl (
l3t 207f
He renie9, then, Qe.t a beirq ich xist9 l as a sex
object i re real or lovle than a f i
the 6oul has fled
But without Dr Talos to refurbish her, olenta
teioates, the lent flesh ^eofte like ax  until
84

q, "she se a lme too long blown'' (Ch 28, pp,
267268, ) ly then,
when de5ire had fled and I uld only lk at
3olenta with pityF I f Ound that thOugh I had
lieved I caced Only fo her irtunate, ose-
flushed flesh and the awkward grace of her nDve-
nts, I l Oved her, (Ch. 28, p, 269, CC)
He can l Ove the hn ing, nOt the Object, and, ce im-
ftantlY, he Unde5tand5 the difeence
While verian knms Jolenta for only a short time,
ver, rcas apars in eve vol Of Severian's 3our-
ney. rca5 s th nmt ul3y hn tO him Of all the
fle aractes and therefOre the nD5t deepl loved of all
e n he neetS rcas s the cecipient of verian's
fir5t acle wi the Claw until she touched Severian's
hand in the lake Of the Garden of Endless Sleep, she had
en lyirq dead beneaM the lake's emba3ming wate, She
saves everian fr drmnirq, he brings he back to life;
they begin on equal footing despite Severian's still
iture, initial peccepti On of rcas as a rail and con-
{used ildn mgh he and rcas are sn separated
at the gate o Messus, he realizes that she is aleady ''n
than a lover, a tnle nion'' (Ch , 35, p. 295, ST) He is
capable of this eali2ation even before Thecla's neTary
ns him' to androgyny, but afterward he is furthe ned
not only to cas's cnionship but to her protection I
want to p Otect yOu fr the opinion of the rld,'' she says
{Ch 22 , p, l99 , CC) She helps him understand that he can
ange, that he need not slie death in his torture'
habi t
TO ne y're Life, and you're a young n naned
veian, and if y wanted to , , be a
cante or a fi5hennan, one ald stop y.
(Ch 22, p 200, CC)
me else but rcas understands his tential fOr ange,
f Or enlightent. Only she n all the sible pres-
Sl On Of neanirqs for Severian's n--f seven to sever
t0 SaviOr. Only she who ''had been y coun5el O in
rlexity and my comrade in a hundred deset places'' can
POVide ''raral shelter'' for Severian (Ch l, p l4, SL).
cas helps him undefstand the elationship tween .
T4l and Baldandes, e nature o the Clawls action, and
the meaning of true friendship in which each person he3ps
a acCepts help the other.

It seems especially hard that they must separate, ag both the power ähd the difficulty of that change ag it Un-
they do a third of the way through Volume Three. Dorcas, folds. I
having recalled something of her life before the Garden ef It 1S clear, then, that The Book quite definitely has
Endless Sleep, must return to that life to complete her Subähäheer net? eübmefged by the tet;ralegy's bargqug Style
past, while Severian must continue on his guest to return but incorporated in it. Urth is a representation of our
the Claw to the Pelerines to fulfill his destiny. Her coun— Earth at an undetermined but very distant time in the fu-
sel has helped the memorious and androgynous Severian become ture. Like any science—fiction speculation, it is not a
wise as well. prediction, but a plausible vision. After "so many cen-
Thcugh Severian's relationships often begin in the tüfiee Of fUt‘·*FitY:°° Earth has been changed by the accro-
sexist mode——torturer and victim, sex subject and sex ob- tions of time. Her rivers have altered, her sun has dirrmed
ject, father—figure and child—figure——they do not remain in until one can see the stars at midday, and the land itself
that mode for long. The torturer becomes his victim, sees is so dense with the artifacts of a million years that min-
the object as an object for pity rather than for use, is a ing and mountain climbing reveal not geologic but ar-
comrade to the child. Why then does Wolfe give us such a chaeological strata. Our Earth is prehistoric, remembered
political fright by casting his characters in their original only in a few hazy myths: of Squanto and a rressiah, for in-
molds of he—man, moon—goddess, sex—goddess, and child-woman? stance. The tetralogy concerns only the doings of the West—·
First of all, as stereotypes, these characters reflect the ern hemisphere, its action taking place in South America.
attitudes of the world in which they live. The world of the In this vision, there are vast central governments, the Com-
old sun is far from Utopian, and its stereotypes are cruel monwealth ruling the culturally heterogeneous south and the
and sexist. People of Severian's society (in contrast to Ascians controlling seemingly homogeneous North America, the
the Ascians) are by and large pushed into what we now think two governments in a state of constant war with one another.
of as traditional male/female roles; this is by no means an ' _ The Commonwealth has a strict caste system, with
unreasonable speculation about the future of an Earth fallen citirens separated not only by influence and wealth but by
on hard times. physique. The taller and more etiolated the figure, the
Second, as archetypes, these characters carry a power— more aristocratic. The head of the government is the
gal Symmlic and amotional gt-aiont gl-om our Graoo.Roman and Autarch, or self—ruler; his position is not inherited, and
Judeo-·Christian traditions. Severian, with his sword and one can proceed from any caste to the autarchy. Most of the
fuligen cape and his profession, begins as the familiar male government operates independently of the Autarch, whose main
figure of cruel death, like those figures of death with his functions seem to be to serve as diplomat to extrasolar
scythe; when he is transformed into a representation of societies and to search for Urth's salvation in a New Sun to
Christ, of death with rebirth, the two archetypes of Death replace the old, dying one.
and Messiah evoke in us a strong tradition of emotion and The Ascians, because they are foreign to Severian, are
meaning. We further remember Diana and Aphrodite and their less completely drawn, but they seem to be ruled by a
avatars when we meet Thecla and Jolenta. As for Dorcas, her bureaucracy and are uniformly indoctrinated to group action
tradition may have begun with Persephone. and group thought ; the Ascian ideal is for the individual to
The characters who populate The Book of the New Sun be conpletely submerged into group identity. The story told
are Haan}; to be represgntative figureg yjho dirgct US to the the Cha[‘aCt€][° "Loyal to the GIOUQ of S€V€l"lt€€n" shows US
tetralegy's meaning. To reveal that meaning, essentially the? this ideal Of a group mind has been Only imperfgctly
Christian, Wolfe uses traditional archetypes of Western reallzeeh
Culture; though is a Sexist tradition, is also an eng- The fauna and flora of are älter-ed EKGH OU! OWY]
tionally powerful and aesthetically rich one. By basing his through genetic engineering and the introduction of ex-
characters on the archetypes of this tradition but allowing tra$°la¥° SPeCieS« öS well as through the usual processes of
them to evolve into more flexible beings, Wolfe takes advan- extinction and evolution. Technology is an odd mix of the
tage of the strength of archetypes while avoiding their Seemingly primitive with the highly advanced. Urth society
potential for rigidity. The final vision of the tetralogy appears to be labor—intensive, no more technologically
is of the New Sun, possible only when humanity has become S0ph1st1cated for the ordinary person in ordinary situations
humane. In Severian, who evolves from archetypal male to thah Would have been the casa, Say, for a person Of the fif__
representative androgene, the change has occurred. We see üéenth century. However, the detritus of past technology,
86 87
_
It see ms es pe cially had that they must separate, as
they dO a third Of the way thr Ough VOl Three rcas,
havi recalled s thing Of her life be -ore the Gaden oe
Endless Sleep, must etun tO that life tO lete he
pa st, ile Severian must cOntinue on his quest to return
the Claw to the Pelerines tO ulill his destiny, He c n-
sel has helped the ne riOus and andrynous Severian c
wise as well
Though Severian's relationships oten gin in the
sexist e--tOrturer and victim, sex subject and sex ob-
ject, ather-figure and child-fige--they do not e ma in in
that TTad e or ìong, The torture be c ane s his victim, sees
the object as an object fo pity rathe than for use, is a
c anr ade to the child, Wh y then d oe s Wolfe give us such a
po litical fright by casting his characters in thei origi na l
cTa lds of he n, n 9 od dess, sex dess, and child n
First of all, as stereotypes, ese characters reflect the
attitudes of the woarld in which they live m e world of the
old sun is ar fr Utopian, and its stereotype5 are cruel
an sexist People of Severian's soc iety (in contrast to
the As cians) are by and large pushed into at we now think
of 3s traditional le/fe ma le roles; thi5 is by no a M an
uneasonable s pe culation a t the future o an Earth fallen
on hard tis
Second, as archet s, these characters car a pO we r-
ful s lic and eTTDtional reight f aJr Gre n and
L!deo-Christian traditîons Seveian, with his sword and
fuligen ca pe and his profession, be gi M as the f anu'liar na le
figure of cruel death, like those figures of death with his
scythe; when he is transform ed into a representation of
Christ, of death with rebirth, e two archet s of a
and messi ah evoke .in us a strong tradition of e ration and
nBaniq We further re mbe r Diana and Aphrodite and thei
aVatar5 When We et m eCla and JOlenta fOr 0rCaS, he
tradition Tna y have be gun with Persephone
The characters who populate me k Of the Mew Sun
are TTe ant to be epresentative figures Wh o diect us to the
tetral09y'5 meanin9 TO reVeal that anln9, eSSent1ally
Christian, Wolfe uses traditional archetypes of Western
culture; though it is a sexist tradition, it is also an e -
tionally pow erful and aesthetically rich one ba sing his
characters on the achet ype s of this tradition but all ing
th em to evolve into nD re flexible be ings, Wole takes advan-
tage o the streng th of archetypes while avoiding their
t.ential for rigidity me final vision of the tetral O9Y
is of the Mew Sun, po ssible only When h wna nity has be
hwnane In Severian, o evOlves fr archetypa l male tO
repesentative andrene, the change has oc curred s
86

_
the er an the ifficulty o that chnge as it un-
folds
Tt is clea, then, that e k qu ite EinitelY has
5ubstanCel nOt SU f9ed by the tetal oY 0 e Style,
t inco rate in it. Urth is a repesentatiOn Of ou
Eerth at an Undetefmined but ve distant tinB in the fu-
ture. Like any science-ictiOn speculation, it is nOt a
redicti On but a plausible vision Ater ''sO ma ny cen-
turies o futucity,'' Earth has en changed by the accre-
tiOns Of t inR' . Her rlVeS ha Ve altered, he SUn haS d d
until one can see the stas at midday and the land itself
i so dense with the atjEacts Of a million yeas that min-
ing and mountain climbing reveal not geologic but ar-
malical stcata. 0ur Earth is prehistoric, rene ed
only in a few hazy myths; OE S qu ant and a s5ia, fOr in-
stance, m e tetal Ogy cOncens Only the dOing5 Of the West-
e hi Shee ltS aC'tl0n taking laCe ln SOUth Am elCa
Tn this vi5l On there are vaSt Cental gO Ver ntS e Can -
nalth nlling the culturally heterOgeneOus sOuth and the
cia ns cOntrolling s mingly h eneous MOr Ul Ame rica, the
to gove nts in a state of constant war wit one anOther
The Co mm onwealth has a stict cdste system, with
citizens separat ed not on1y by i nf luence and alth t by
ysi0e. me talle and moe etiolated the figure, the
re aistocatic. The head E the govenment is the
AUtarCh, Or Self ru lei hS po Slti On lS nOt l nh eltedl and
one can preed r any ca5te to the autachy, t Of the
gove nne nt ocates indepe ndently Of the Autach, wh main
unctions seem to be to seve as diplomat to extrasoar
s oc ieties and tu search for Urth's salvation in a Mew Sun tO
replace the old, dying on e
m e cians, be cause they are freign to Severian, ae
less c Ompletely dawn, but they eem tO be ruled by a
bureaucracy and are uniEo nnl y ind oc tinated to gr Ou p acti On
and group thought; e Ascian ideal is for the individual to
c letely s u&ne rged into goup identity. m e sto told
b the character ''yal to the Group of Seventeen'' sh ms us
that this ideal of a goup mind has heen Only ' rfectly
ealiz ed.
m e auna and floa of Urth ae alteed fr r am
thrOugh genetic engineering and the introductim o ex-
tfalar species, a5 ll as through e usual processes of
eXtincti On and e lution. Technol is an od d mix of the
Seiqly primitive with the high3y advan ced Uh soc iety
aPPears to labo-intensive, mOe technOl og ically
Phisticated for the ordinary peson in ordi situations
than m ld have been the case, say, fo a person Of the fif
tnth century. H me ver, e detitus o past tenol ,
87

such as the rocket ship that houses Severian's guild and the the fantastic as well' ’
introduced technology of 9Xt1C°äSOlö.f 5OCl€‘tl€S: Such as the what seem mcre like ma j_ th h h
weapcns which the Commonwealth uses, intrude a level cf ith the ScienC€_fiét’iOnal agmcéf l°Ug.b.tl.€Y am hahdléd
technical sophistication that might seem magical tc many Zpeculations On time we have SG;}öléänillgéyépiäilvlosfgni
members cf the Coumonwealth. Thus does Arthur C. Clarke's . - ' . „ . . „
law, tttt tty ttthndidgy dddnditdny advanced will Sem ;§§l;§§t;„t;ä"§§$a§§Xtt;“ttS‘1E‘?t'l,t^“§t”*§§§t§“§g“tSt’t"@“’ hiiy
· l I t _ . _ _ _ y an ree wi
mag1caTheOä;eäuäations that most closely evoke traditional both älatgggc ihd hqhälstlam . Th? tetralogy hescriheé
uses of science in science fiction are The Book's military ;äVer§Ot;?ica§UCG;r§€lC Zltgr älm ln a_ ‘”‘O'°}'ma9lCal Wal/
speculations. Wolfe discusses these in his appendix to the wh? h seem tO t htah lat er Ihere S mlrrOrS'_bOth Of
fourth volume, "The Aims of the Autarch and the Ships of the ii;} a quasjfsgägsäggicpgsple (lr. Okpects through tlm€' are
Hierodules" and in his chapter, "Cavalry in the Age of the g p aha lOh'
Autarch," frcxn The CaSt].9 of the Ot‘C@f The appendix nctes F fl t d ' ‘ ' ·
tttt Uttt tttt——·——···~—„tttty txtttt dd three 1«dve1s= the ddd tärätiitiiti i€“g$t§°it€t“§“t"§t”°§“° an °*’”°°°
level, similar to our historical situation of the fifteenth universe and therefore aan O;. ags hflohr
century, and representative of "thé t9ChflOlOQiCö]- abilitll Of brought ihto existence (Ch 20 J€cl86wlST be
the society as a whole"; the Urth level, "the highest tech- ° ' ’ p' ' )
nology to be found on the planet, and perhaps in the solar Th h th - . . . _
system"; and the stellar level, which represents a level of Commougcn wi;)aäääglggiggäogyehi;?O§hlSq;;Ela3?;ä;nT;a:8 rngrihm
· · r r I lUS an
t@°h“?l°9Y higher thahfahy produced Oh UÜ‘h' ahd lmported DY with modern science, the passage is recognizable as that
the hlerodhles (hppehduh pp' 3l4_3l5' CAL The presehce Of comnon science—fictional device the lausible l '
so many levels of technology partly explains the strangeness The Science in Science fiction gften p exp ahatlom
„ . _ . _ presents this paradox:
of the novels mechanisms of war. everything from swords to lt must be offered in a plausible Scientific
lasers and beyond. wh th · . . . ’ . mahhem
Wolfe‘s other science-fictional explanation for the no? 6rTäESwO;;<;a\;?)%(<ä;§l t?,;?_]l9?;li‘t3CStt€ä;Er;g ahglthhory Or
~ - - · _· _ _ _ cea e in any
bizarre- differences of The Book'? seemingly fantastic Science flctlon which Speculates On time.
battles 1S the speculation that the pivotal science of the The novels discuss time—travel ted .
future will not be . . . mechanical like that of the recent science ficticn thgu n ‘ I an acchp motlf Of
. . . g it has no solid place in the present
past, nor electronic like that of the present. It w1ll be state of scientific knowled e The e E
biologicay, Ucavalry in the Age Of the Autarch," pp. 52-53: ture and Severian are descrgbed as I:;nan§iO‘<tio$vhec;l;_
Co). lf this is true, then, it becomes scientifi<=al1Y ridcra cf t' M t  · · · ·—
plausible tc alter the genetics Of animalS and @V@¤ P€OPl€ Several epo;h\;·cf äimir ii; ähezzuiiraä ebuhlt to extst ‘m
tQ fc;-m mcre efficient fighting "machin@S·" And then we Uh' are given science·ficticnall lausiblei Ei emtuiena O tune
derstand the pr€S@nC€ of ÖGSTZITÄGKSI m€‘l°YChiPSrahd Master Ash Says is- y p Xp ana 10nS. Time,
arsinoithers; they are not mythical beasts but genetically ' °
engineered cavalry animals. Wolfe's use of several levels a we ° t .
tt ttttttttty, ttt his ttttttttmt O. . techneloqy mt ye alli1\il:§ét?On;peSt;yr§}iiä»„egtihiäaäogjclidr ä“
Ve;-y advanced in our time contribute to the t@tl‘öl0QY°5 aum You will trace a cclcr forward what cols;
of fantasy. cannot know wn‘t I
. . . lead you to me green to
Arthur C ClaI‘k€'S dlCtUm Oper-ates ln the feälm Of yOu[‘ [ee 1 I
military speculation as well. We see the magic in theßä g n man ( ’ p ’ )
speculations about greatly advanced technology an It haS'a Solidity Of existence which makes all ems acces-
categorize the novels as fantasy. In spite of thls Slble ln Some way to all Others and SO timeüravel is _
categorization (volumes frau the tetfalOgY }’1<3V€ WOT! two gah- Stine- Thus the Claw works as Dorcas explains b tw'
tasy awards), the novels use the methods of science fictl¤“' t¤¤e‘s fabyjc: ' ’ Y ls mg
employing scientific speculation about the future; however;
their use of medieval and Renaissance referents and 0 when YOU bmu ht th hl b K t lf .
themes and archetypes associated with fantasy may S¤QQeSt because the Cäaw tweisieäntiäg fo; hli; E;
88 8 89
__ _
such as the rket ship that house5 Severian's guild and the
intr0duced technol Of extrasOlar societies, such as the
apons which the CorMnonwealth uses, intude a level o
technical sophisticati On that might seem magica3 to ny
n of the nwealth mus ds Arthu C. Clake's
law, that any technOl Ogy suiciently advanced will seem
magical, rate.
me speculations that rast cosely evOke traditiona
uses of science in science iction ae me k's milita
sculations Wolfe discusses these in his appendix to the
frth vol , ''e Aims Of the Autarch and e Ships of the
Hierules'' and in his chapter, ''Cavalry in the e of the
Autar,'' fr me Castle o the Otte, me appendix notes
that Urth technology exists on three levels e smith
level, simila to a1 historical situati On Of the fiteenth
centu, ard representative of ''the technOlOgical ability of
the siety as a whole''; the Urth level, ''the highest tech-
nology to be found on the planet, and pehaps in the sola
system''; and the stellar level, which represents a level of
tenology higher than any praduced on Urth, and irted by
the HieoduleS (AppendiX, QQ 3l'3l5 CA), me peSenCe Of
so ny levels o tenol partly explains e strangeness
of the novels ' chanisrK o war: everythiq fran swords to
lasers and beyOnd
lfe's other sciencefictional explanation {or the
biarn dierences of The BOok 's seemingly fantastic
battles is the speculation at the ''pivotal science of the
future will not . nechanical like that Of the ecent
past, no electronic like that o the present, It will
biolical'' (''Caval in the e of the Autarch,'' , 52-53,
CO) f this is true , then, it becomes scientificallY
plausible to alter the genetics of animals ard even le
to fo re efficient fighting ''machines.'' md then un-
dersta the presenoe of detriers, merychips,and
aiithen; they are not nythical asts but geneticallY
engined caval anils, Wolfe's use of seveal levelS
of techlo9y, nd his scuations on a technOloy t yet
ve advanced in tine contribute to the tetal's aUa
o antasy
Arthur C. Clarke's dictum operates in the rea Of
military s1ation as well. Me see the magic in the Se
speculations about greatly advanced technology and
categorize the novels as fantasy, In spite of thiS
tegorization (volunes fr the tetaly have n twO fa'
tesy aerds), the novels use the thods of scien fiCt OnI
loying scientific epeculation at the futue, ha3eVe,
their use of medieval and Reneissance refefents a Of
themes and achetypes associated with fantasy y suggeSt
88

the fantaStiC aS Well.
Mat seem nDre like magic, though they are handled
i the SCienCe"iCtl Onal aim Of laUSibilit, a MOlfeS
sculations on tine. Me have seen simila speculations
ealie, e5eCially in ''SeVen riCan Mi9htS''i hCe ey
afe exnded and linked t0 VieW5 Of eality and f Will,
th Platonic and Chistian. The tetralogy describes
several cOnStUCtt lC alter tine n a nOn-magiCal WaY
The BotaniCal Caden and Father Inere'S mirrO, th Of
i'ch s ee m to trans po t pe op le or objects th rough ti rTB , are
i'ven a qu asi-scientific e xp lanation:
Fo a eflected i ge to exist wit ou t an ject
to originate it violates the laws of Our
universe, and thereore an Object will be
brOU9ht intO eXiStenCe (Ch 20, l86, ST)
m gh the ass tions hind this explanation have ra re in
C n Wth r9e5l StO ry ''Tl On, ba , OfbiS Te rt iUS'' tha
with modern science, the passage is ce nizable as at
SCie -fiCti Onal deVCe, the laU5lble eXplanati On.
m e ecience in cience fiction oten presents th is pa radox
it mUSt be Ofefed in a laUSble, 5CientiflC manner,
wt3ether it aI ld hold up to scientific testing and theo Or
not This paadoxical view is most noticeable in any
science fiction ich 5culates on ti.
me navels discuss ti-tavel, an accepted nDtif Of
xience fiction th gh it has no solid place in the present
State Of scientific kn ledge, The green ma n r an the fu-
tUre and Severian are desci bed as ru nni ng up and r-
oE t ' t4aste Ashs house is built to exist in
al e hs o ti, and these strange phenanena of tine
ae given scien -fictionally plausible e lanations. Ti ne,
Ste As h says, is:
a aVn9 a taSt that eXtendS fOeVef ln
all diections. I follax a thread backwa.
Y will tace a colof forward, hat cOlO T
nnOt kn . Mh ite y lead y Ou to , green to
Y green ma n. (Ch. l7, p. l35, )
It a Sodty of exstence wh'c ma es al er,s acces_
Sble in s vay to all others and so tine-travel i5 _
ble m us te claw orks, as rcas e lai ns, by twisiin
t ' 's f ric..
en you brought the uhlan ba c to life it was
Cause the claw twist tine or him to the
89

. . . . I was cold and hungry. I lay upon my back en-
. . ll . 84- . '
ä(‘;m;L?t whlch ht Still lu/ed (Ch ’ pp circled by brown walls, and heard the sound of
’ my own screams. Yes, I must have been an in-
The solidity of time contrasts with the nebulgugnegg Of the fällt- Net ¤ld enough to crawl, I think, (Ch,
world we can see· 35' pp° 283-28% CA)
our e es receive a rain of photons without mass Sanehowl the intervening time in his childhood, which would
or chyar e from swarmin particles like a bil- tell Severian who his parents were, where he came from, has
lion biälion suns g From the pattering of been forgotten. At various points in Severian's recounting
those photons we ·believe we see a man. Some— of his "more than normally turbulent" sunmer, he loses con-
times the man we believe we see may be as il- sciousness and cannot therefore report what has occurred.
lusory as Master Ash or more so. (Ch. 18, p. Thu? wte become aware of another imperfection in Severian s
per ec memory.
l39' CA) Both of these causes for unreliability are relatively
The ihsubstantiality of that which can be Seen, in Contrast iii); SFB äträeinaytäg ülsggladäciiileult 15 Sever1an's knowledge
to the solidity of time, that which cannot be seen, has °
central thematic importance for The Book. For now, let it I . . .
be noted that the presence of an explanation, the use of team In SOm?IO€e%riiUä;Si;9'lén gehgjrélgd Sin
words like "photons," puts these speculations on time in the miné ;]aé got lying to man alläny falsehoodsywere
realm of science fiction. _ _ I I
Connected with The Book's speculations on time are its recollmg On me' and; who remembergd everythmg
. .—-——— . could not be certain those memories were more
thematic concerns with memory. Because Severian remembers than my Own dreams (Ch 3 P 36 ST)
everything, all the events of his life may be said to ° ° ’ ' ’
cOeXlSt' The alzapo not Only Captläreä people ¤ut’ what? C Nor Can we: we must forget any idea of determining what
devours them' }t captures _t ett memqr]"€§' t elf really happened in some factual sense. With Severian's ac-
personalit1es——so lt captures their existence 1n time. Both knowledgment Of his madness that becomes a futile taSk_ d
Severian and the alzabo have power over past time through even if he were not inSan€' we Could never be Certainrwägt
$Z‘“E§§‘ (iä’°%§i'31Eää*;ä2d“i?“ä.iiGt?S."°;”§§ ?.“§.§?““f§€ pm Of bis wem 0% the w¤¤¤¤ w<>¤¤· what <>f us
m ; dr . . _
example) are confirmed by his view here. Severian forgets fieaTS' any more than we Campe sure m OUrSelV€$' The dlt
. . Cu ty which Wolfe sets up in his tetralogy reminds us that
nothing, but that does not mean we can accept his story as mEmOry„S role is to reserve the ast as a Sto}? not
an exact duplication of the reality around him; a perfect document- Memory dogs not du licgte the ast. Yirt iVe<;S ii
‘“t“‘°tY ÖOGS “°t gtatanttt a t’t"ttttlY ““F’ttj“dt°td' totally Shape, just as fiction sha spa Vision an;-Z1 ie not rgeant to
conscious, completely sane one. Such filters, are part of be taken at face Value pe
the human baggage and therefore inevitably tint Severian'S Gene WOlf€,S fgction is Severiaws memoir and both
telling of his story- Clöfify that the tetra ' '
. . . . . . logy is not meant to be taken strictly
AS be Malls hl? Gamer Me the ¤r@¤¤¤1<=@S_ whlch at face Value. Fiction, like memaes, like the world ir-
colored his earlier vision return too: the trust in the Self, is meant to be del ed into for ,,1a S f 1.t
rightness of torture, the naive admiration of Vodalus, Che xneath the reality we Seel] (Ch 16 P Mtger S1?) reäoäfä
sexist attitude toward women. These are the prej¤diC@$ ot and Severian · ' I ° I ·°
. . . . . _ (who compares himself to a wolf in Volume
äeo¤£;1;r;;s culture and upbr1¤91¤g« easy te lde¤‘=lfY and at remind ue to interpret their fiction/memoir/world by
° . . mQ US several times to do so. The clearest instruction
· we alsq knmv that sever1an's total. recall applles Onlä appears in Chapter 32 Of The Shadow of the Torturer, when
to his conscious life; it extends to his childhood but he Dürcas a d - .
to his Origins In the first Volume he describes his ear__ a Se tnk Severian discuss the idea that the universe has
. ° , ',„ . Cre e" .271,1 ‘ ‘
liegt memory, that of a little boy "pllmg pebblee ln the a Seetion lxjägtääg Suclä key; Säge;;gnk;yby??§31hbgä_)];;nL;,hää;tr?aS
Old Yard" (Ch. 2, p. 18, ST): later in the tetralogy, he ’ '
says he remembers something much earlier: 91
90
__ _ _
int at which he still ived (Ch ll, pp 84
85, sL)
me solidity of tine' ntasts with the nebulousness of the
world we can see
our eyes eceive a rain o photons without mass
or chage Ean swaing paticles like a bil
lion, billi On suns, , , F the pattering o
those photons we believe we see a man -
ti5 the n m believe we see may be as il-
luso as Master h or nare so, (Ch l8, p
l39, )
me insUbStantialitY Of that whiCh Can Seen, in nt CaSt
tO the SOlidity Of time, that WhiC CannOt be 5een, haS
ntral thtic ' rtance fo- The Baok, For na3, let it
nOted that the re5ence 00f an elanati On, the USe 0f
words like ''photons, '' puts ese speculations on tine in the
realm of science fiction
Connected with me k's speculations on ti are its
tic concerns with nenDry, cause Severian eners
everything, all the events of his life may be said to
coexist me alzabo not only captues le but, when it
deVOUr5 them it CaptUes their memOieS, the1r
rsonalitieso it captres their existence in ti, th
verian and the alzabo have r ove past time through
memOry, Wolfe's earlier view5 oE the paFe and truth Of
memory ( in The Fifth Head of Cerberus and Peace, for
exle) are cOnfi by his view here Sevein fogets
nothing, but that d0es t nean we can accept his story aS
an exact duplication of the reality around him: a rfect
às nOt guaantee a per{ectly unprejudiced, tOtallY
conscious, completely sane one Such filten are pa Of
the hn baggage and therefoe inevitably tint Severian'S
telling of his story.
As he ecalls his earlier life, the prejudices i
colored his earlier vision retu too: the trutt in the
rightness of torture, the naive a&niration of Vbdalus, the
sexist attitude tard n. mese are the pnjudices Of
Verian'S CU3tUre and Ubriing eaSY tO identify and aC'
cnt for.
e also kn that Severian's total recall applies Onl1
to his nscis life., it extende to his childh b0ut t
to his oigins In the irst vol, he describee his ea'
liest , that oE a little boy ''pili bbles in e
Old Yard" (Ch 2, p l8, ST) later in the tetral, he
says he renBs sthing ch ealier
90

I was col and ung I lay upon my back, en-
circled by br walls, and heard the sound o
my axn scearrG. Yes, I must have been an in-
fant. Mot old enOugh to crawl, I think. (Ch.
35, pp 283-284, )
h, the intervening ti in his childh, wich would
tell Severian whO his paents were, where he c r, has
en forgotten. At vai Ous pOints in Severian's recOunting
of his ''rare than nOrmal.ly turbulent'' sr, he lo5es cOn-
scisne5s and cannOt theefOe repOrt what has Occured.
mus we bec awae Of anOthe irfection in Seveian's
fect .
Both O these causes fOr uneliability ae relatively
easy to gauge. ar re dificult is Severian's knledge
that his min y be unbalanced.
I am in s degee insane.... I had lied Of-
ten.... mov I could no longer be sue my am
mind was not lying to ; all ny falseh0Ods were
recoiling on rre, and I who rembered everything
could not be certain those rTDies were TTare
than ny mn drean6. (Ch. 3, p. 36, ST)
r can we: we must foget any idea of determining what
reall happened in s factual sense. With Severian's ac-
knmlednt of his dness, that cs a futile task; and
even if he were not insane, m could neve be rtain at
Pa Of his memoy was o the waking world, what Of his
eams, any re than we can be sure in ourselves. me dif-
ilty which olfe 5et5 up in his tetral reminds us that
's role is to presee the past as a story, nOt as a
dnt. me ds not duplicate e past: it give5 it
Sha just a5 fiction shape5 a vi5ion and is nOt neant to
ten at face value.
ne Wole's fiction is Severian's rrerair and th
Clariy that the tetal i5 not ant to be taken strictly
at aCe value. Fiction, like rie5, like the world it-
Sel, is meant to delved into for lllayer5 o reality
neath the reaty we see'l (ch. l6, p. l4g, sT). t3olf
a Severian (who comare5 him5elf to a wol in volumem
) rind 45 to interet their iction/rai/world b
telling us severa tis to do 5o. me c3ea,est instcti
aPars in c
rcas and sevefi e, n dis Ocus_s ethe ;de, that "the univer e ha5
a Secret key (p 27) n sever;an's b k, i
a Section listn su hke s s one ke whch clai that..
9l

Cep;5 aesus into nis or ner soul through the symbolic par-
evafythihg, _What§V@_¤‘ happene, has three mean" taking of Jesus' body and blood. Spring and various other
ings. The first iS its practleal meaning, what Symbgls of rebirth, central to Christianity, among other
the book calls 'the thing the plowman sees.' religions, Occny repeatedly,
The second is the reflection of tha world about These rebirth symbols remind us of the novels' or-
it ---· That ml-Qht_b€ Called tha SO¤thSaY@fS' ganizing and eponymous symbol, the sun. In The Castle of
meaning, because lt is the one such people use the Otter, Wolfe explains the range of this symbol:
when they prophesy a fortunate meeting from ""'—°“
tracks of serpents .... Tne third is the tran— The Book of the New Sun is full of all kinds of
substantial meaning. Since all objects have gymbolism .... I mentioned the rose symbolism,
their ultimate origin in the Pancreator, and all and Roger Stewart just wrote me from Austin,
were set in motion by him, so all must GXDKGSS Texas mentioning the tree symbolism. But the
his Will··—whiCh is the higher faalitl/~ (Ch- 32, symbol of the sun is central, primary, as the
p 272, ST) titles of both The Book of the New Sun itself
and The Shadow of the Torturer show.
So our world, Severian's memoir, and Wolfe's fiction all (lndirectlyl EOSQS and tmes arg Sun Symbglg
demand such threefold interpretation. It is a notion very too .... ) Urth is dying as the sun gutters;
close to the medieval one of quadruplex allegory» There, its people retain a legend that the Conciliator
each thing, each story had a literal meaning ("what the will return and revive the sun, and thus this
plowman sees"), a metaphorical one, an analogical one (these renascent Conciliator is called the New Sun. A
two are combined in the "soothsayers' meaning"), and an member of the Seekers for Truth and Penitence
anagogical one (which corresponds to its "transubstantial stands between his victim and the sun . . ., and
meaning"). symbolically terminates the life prior to taking
Here, in The Book of the New Sun, the practical mean- it. ( . . . The Claw of the Conciliator is a
ing consists of the story of the young man exiled from his sun symbol.) ("Sun of Helioscope," pp. 14-15,
guild who goes on a quest to return the Claw of the Con- CO)
ciliator. The soothsayers' meaning lies in the tetralogy's
vision of our future. The transubstantial meaning is its 'I‘he sun is figuratively reborn every day; on this future
Christian, messianic one. It is to this transubstantial Urth, people await its literal rebirth. The Conciliator
meaning that so many clues lead us. Many of the repeated will be reborn to bring about the miracle and that is why he
symbols of the tetralogy are associated with Christianity, is called the New Sun. Like the original Conciliator, the
the speculations on time harken back to Corinthians, and New Sun must brin moral enli htenment as well as literal.
. . . . . . 9 9 . .
Severian is a Christ figure who hopes to save the world from The Conciliator, the novels make clear, 1S Christ, the Son.
eternal darkness. The Conciliator's power is the power to manipulate
Many of the recurring symbolic images of The Book of That, Dorcas explains, is how the Claw of the Con-
the New Sun are associated directly or indirectly with Cillator works, turning back time to the point at which a
Christianity. Holy Katherine, the patronness of the Seekers victim lives. But, the more we examine such evidence as
for Truth and Penitence, is based on St. Catherine, the T“f1skele's rescue from the garbage heap well before Severian
Christian martyr who died on the wheel. She was an educated $0und the Claw, the more we realize that the power lies not
aristocrat who was killed by a torturer; she reminds us of ln the Claw but in Severian, not in his representation or
Thecla, and she is mentioned throughout the tetralogy. $YmbolRbut in the Conciliator himself.
Caves and tombs recur throughout as well; Severian enters ealizing the connection between the Conciliator and
them and he escapes them. Among their other associati0¤S w°1f‘?°S Speculations on time, we realize the philosophical
(with the female principle, and with ancient myStafY ‘gi=¤¤1¤g behind the science—fictional one, the transubstan-
religions, for instance) is their association with the Ca‘/6 tlal meaning behind the soothsayers' one. The transubstan-
which was Jesus‘ tomb. The cannibalism of the alZabO alal meahlng is two—fold. First, it justifies the Christian
ritual, which results in the gaining of another's mem0L’Yr Sgd PlatOhlC idea in Corinthians that "the things which are
parallele the communion ritual by which the Christian ac' an are temporal; but the things which are not seen are
92 93
s_o world, s_everlan s memo, and ol e 5 _lc n al
everything, whatever happens , has tree nean-
ings. The first is its practical aning, what
the ook calls 'the thing the plownen sees
me second is the eflection of the world aut
it.... mat ' ght called the thsaye '
aning, cause it is the one 5uch Ople use
when they prophe5y a fortunate meeting fr Om
tracks of serpents.... me third is the tran-
substantial meaning. Since all Objects have
their ultimate Origin in the PancreatOr, and all
n set in tion by him, so all must express
hi5 will-ich is e higher eality. (Ch. 32,
p 272, ST)
' l ' Wfl 'ti
denend such threefold interpretation. Tt i a noti On ve
cloee to the dieval one of 0adplex allegOy There,
eaCh thingF eaCh StO had a liteal meann9 (''What the
pln sees'') , a taphorical one, an analogical one (these
two ae ined in the ''soothsayers' meaning'' ), and an
anagogical one (which corresnds to its ''tanstantial
aning'')
Here, in e k of the Yew Sun, the practical an-
ing consists of the story of the yOung n exiled ran his
guild Who s m a est to etun the Claw of the Con-
cilator. me sthsayers' aning lies in the tetcal's
vision of r future. me tranubstantial meaning is its
Christian, messianic one. It is to this transstantial
neaniq that so ny clues lead us. many of the reated
sl5 of the tetral are asociated wi Christianity,
e speculations m t' harken back to COrinthians and
Severian i a Christ igun who hopes to 5ave the wOrld fr
etenal darkne5s.
Many of the eri slic ' ges of me k Of
the Mew Sun are as5ociated dicectly or indirectly with
Christianity. Hoy Kathei, the patronness of e 5eekers
for Truth and enitence, is ba5ed on St, Catherine, e
Christian rtyr o died on e whl She was an educat
aistocrat who was killed by a torturer; she eminds us Of
Thecla, and she is mentioned throughout the tetral OgY.
Caves and t rmr thraqhout as well; Severiar ente
them and he escapes them, q their Other ass0ciatiO
(with the female principle, and with ancient mysterY
rel9imS, f O in5tance) iS their aSSocat0n Wth the Ve
whi was Jeeus' tomb. The cannibalism of the alza
ritual, which reults in the gainin9 of another's
parallels the nion ritual by which the Christian aC-
92

_ __
ceps 3u3 llLu lll Or e SOUl tnrOU9 the SllC Pa,-
taking of esus' y and blOOd, Spring and variOus Other
syols Of ebifth Cental tO Chistianity, ng Other
religionS, CUr eatedly.
mee rebifth sols emind us o the novels ' or-
gani2ing and enuS symbOl, the sun. In _The Castle Of
e Otter, WOle explains the range of this sl;
The k Of the Mew Sun is ull of all kinds of
slism, . , I nentioned the rose slism,
and ROge Stewart just wrote fr Austin
Texas nenti Oning the tree symbolism. But the
symbol Of the sun is cental, primary, as the
titles O bOth Te k of the Yew Sun itself
and The Shad_a3 Of the Torturer show
(Indirectly, rOses and trees are sun syols
tOO . . .) Urth is dying as the sun guttes;
its peOple retain a legend that the Conciliator
will eturn and evive the sun, and thus this
renascent Conciliator is called the Mew Sun. A
member Of the Seekers for Tth and Penitence
stands between his victim and the sun. ,. , and
slically teinates the life prio to taking
it, ( . . me Claw of the Conciliator is a
sun sl) (''Sun o Helioscope,'' pp l4-l5,
)
me sUn is Eiguratively reborn every day; on this futue
Urth, pe Ople await its literal rebirth. me Conciliator
Will reborn to bring about the mi' racle and that is y he
lS Called the yew Sun. ike the oiginal Conciliator, the
W SUn st bring TTDal enlightent as well as literal.
me COnciliator, the novels ke clear, is Chri5t, the Son.
me COnciliato's power is the pOwer tO manipulate
t' . mat, rcas explain5, is ha3 the Claw of the Con
CiliatOr mrks, tuning ck ti to the point at which a
VlCtim lives. But, the more we examine such evidence as
sele's resc4e fr the gabage heap well beore severian
nd the claw, the ,e m reaii2e that the power lie5 not
ln e Claw but in severian, not in his re resentati
Sl but in the conciliator himself.
Realizing the connection tween the Conciliator 3nd
lfe's scuiations on ti, we realize the phi3oso phi
aning hind the science_fctonal one the transubs tt i
al aning beh' nd the 5ihsa ers ' oné The transubstant i
al aniq 's two_fod Frst t ustEes the chr5tan
and Platonic idea in corinthians thai 'the this hi
Seen are tem orai. u he ih n s
93

eternal.(4) Second, it allows precognition with free will, a certain way.
another Christian idea, this one associated especially with The young witch who helps the Cumaean call up the dead
medieval theol0gy , _ l _ in The Claw of the Conciliator offers a similar explahation
To shcw the applicability of the quotation from Second rer the cumaearvs ability to recall the dead and see the
Corinthians to the tetralogy, let us consider again the no- future:
tions of time that were discussed earlier. Objects, we are
told, can be brought into existence simply to fulfill images All time exists ____ If the ruture did not
in mirrors. The images, then, rather than their objective exist new, hgq ceuld we jeurney teward it? If
presence, determine their existence, and thereby their ob— the past dees net exist still, hew ceuld we
jective existence is relatively unimportant; it is insub— leave it behind us? In sleep the mind is en-
stantial. 'Ihis notion of the insubstantiality of objects is circled by its time, which is why we SQ etten
clarified when Severian muses that "from the pattering of hear the veices et the dead there, and receive
those photons we believe we see a man." Objects reflected intelligence et things to ceme_ These who have
in mirrors, men we see, are temporary, brought into exiet— learned to enter the same state while wakihg
€nC€ SCXTE outside force, I‘€pr€S€l"lt€d only Ö. pÖtt€r].ÜQ live Surrotlnded their mm lives, even as the
of photons, flickering before our sight. "The things which Abraxas perceives all of time as an eternal i¤··
are seen are temporal": temporary, controlled by time. stant. (Ch. 31, p. 289, CC)
Time itself is ·solid; compared to a tapestry whose threads
can be traced backward and forward, it determines whether Because time has permanent, selid existence, then, we chggse
objects exist or not, in time, and it determines whether men freely in a werld already determined;
live or die, in time. Time, which we cannot see, has a sub-
stantiality which seen things do not: "the things which are It is in such fashion most sages explain the ap-
not seen are eternal." parent paradox that though we freely choose to
We are meant to extend the list of things that are not dg this gr the ether, eemhit some cring gr by
SGGH, of COUISGZ lt includes S€V€K'läl’l'S Qfädüal rejection altrtligln gteal the Sacred dlgtlnctlgn Of [hg Em-
of cruelty and acceptance of compassion and his vision of pyrian, still the lncreate Cqmiands the ehtitety
the holiness of all creation received in "The Sand Garden" and is served Qqually (that lg, totally) by
(Ch. 31) of The Citadel of the Autarch. These eternal these who weuld ehey and these Whg wguld rebel,
truths, being abstract, are invisible, eternal, and real. (Ch. 27, p. 219, SL)
Because of their nature, they must be experienced, as the
passage of time is experienced, not shown, as objects are. God, having created the world just as he had designed, sees
We must live through Severian's experiences, live within his its eeeratien just as he had elanned it, though the
prejudices and experience their alteration, before we can operators run by their own free will. Severian, not under-
understand what he learns. If it could be seen directly, standing his role in the bringing of the New Sun, neverthe—
stated baldly, it would be only temporal. The mazes of less acts of his own volition, as the Increate planned him
elaborate detail in Wolfe's baroque style take on a new to.
necessity: they replicate the way we approach unseeable, These are complex ideas of Christianity, one linked to
eternal ideas. Platonic notions of the ideal and real versus that which we
Time's solidity, its verity, which makes time-travel see, the other coping with the paradox of predeterminism
possible, also explains another Christian belief. How, versus free will. They support Wolfe's statement that:
people have asked, can humanity have free will if God knows
all that we will ever do? How can there be precognition I am a Catholic, in the real c¤m1union·-taking
with free will? Boethius, a medieval Christian philosopher, sense, which tells you a lot less than you think
answered this question in his Consolation of Philosophy; about my religious beliefs .... I believe in
Gene Wolfe implies the same answer in The Book of the New God, in the divinity of Christ and in the sur-
äigl. Because God sees time all at once, says Boethius, he vival of the person.(5)
knows ahead of time how we will choose, and that choice fits
his divine plan, but his knowledge doesn't make us choose in
94 95
__
eternal.(4) Second, it alows precognition wiM Eee will,
another Christian idea, this One as5ociated escially with
TTdieval theOl.
To 5hm the applicability oE the quotation fr Send
COrinthians to the tetralagy, let us consider again the no-
tione of ti that were discussed ealiec. Objects, are
told, can braJ9ht into existence simply to fulill images
in nu'KKos. me una' ges, then, rathe than their objective
presence, deteine their existen, and thereby their Ob-
Jective existen is elatively unimportant; it is insub-
stantial. mis notion of the iMubstantiality of objects is
clarified when Severian ses that ''fran the pattering o
the photons we believe we see a man.'' Objects reflected
in mirro, nBn we see, are temporary, brought into exist-
en by s outside foce, represented only by a tterirq
oE photOns, flickeri beore sight. ''me this which
are seen ae tempoal'': temporary, controlled by time.
T' itsel is 'solid; cred to a tastry whe threads
can be taced bacwad and forward, it determines whether
objects exist or not, in tine, and it teines wihether nen
li or die, in ti. Tine, which we cannot see, has a s-
stantiality i seen things do not: ''the things Which are
nOt seen are etemal. ''
are neant to extend the list o things that a not
seen, of cour5e: it includes Seveian's gadua1 rejection
of cnlelty and acceptance of cssion and his vision of
the holiness of all creation eived in ''me Sa Qrden''
(Ch. 3l) of The Citadel of the Autarch. These etenal
truths, beirq bstract, are invisible, eteal, and real
CaU5e Of their natUre, they 5t be eXpeieCed, aS the
passage of ti is erienced, not shmn, as objects are
We st live thgh Severian's expeiens, live wiMin his
pre7udis and exrien their alteration, before we can
undentand what he learns If it ald be seen diectlY,
stated baldly, it would be only temporal. The mzes Of
elaborate detail in F3olfe's barOque style take on a rRW
nece5Sity they epliCate the WaY we apprOach unseeable
etemal ideas.
Time's solidity, its veity, which nakes t' -travel
sible, alsO explains anOthe Christian belief. HOM,
le have asked, can humanity have free wi3l if kn
all that m will ever do? Y can there pecogniti On
with free will? thius, a nadieval Christian philasef,
answeed this question in his _COnsOlation o Philas00 i
ne lfe ' lies Me answer in me k of the M
5un. cause God ss tine al at on, sam thius, he
knm5 ahead of t' hm we will che, and that choice EitS
his divine plan, but his knmledge dsn't make us choOse in
94

_
a tan WaY
me young witch who helps the Cean call up the dead
n me Claw af the Conci3iator oen a similar elati On
for the Cumaean's ability to ecall the dead and s e
futue i
All tine exists.. Tf the Eutue did nOt
exist nm, h cOuld we journey ta it? Tf
the past does not exist still, how could we
leave it behind us? Tn sleep the mind is en-
cicled by its ti, which is why we sO often
hear the vois of the dead thee, and recejve
intelligence of thiqs to c, mose Who have
learned to entet the sane state while waking
live sua3nded by their am lives , even as the
Abraxas petceives all of tine an eternal in-
stant (Ch. 3l, p. 289, )
cause tine ha5 pennanent, solid existen, then ch
fly in a rld aleady detei
It is in s3ch fashion nDst sa9es elain the a
pant paadox that though we feely che tO
do this or the othe, cannit ci or by
alti steal the sacred distinctim Of e
pyian, still the Inceate nds the entirety
and is served equally (that is, tOtally) by
those who wld obe a th who ld rel
(Ch. 27, p. 2l9, S)
, haViq Created the tld JUst aS he had Si9n, SS
i4 operatim just as he had planned it, thOugh the
ratos n by thei am free will. veian, t un-
standing his le in the binging Of the w Sun, vethe-
less acts o his liti, as the Inceate planned him
to
me ae lex ideas of ChristianitY, One link tO
Plata3ic notions o the ideal and real vesus at which
9ee the other i with the paadox of pedeteinism
s r ill. mey surt Molfe's statnt thati
T am a Catholic, in the al nim-tiq
senæ, i tells y a lot less than y think
t y ligis liefs., I believe in
, in the divinity of mrist a in e sur-
vival of the non.(5)
95

repeatedly linked to the New Sun. The circle of associa-
His notion of a suitable Christ figure, the torturer tions iS complete: Severian, the Conciliator, the New Sun,
Severian, also reveals Wolfe's complex and surprising faith. and Chrieß _ _
In The Castle of the Otter, Wolfe illuminates his idea of We khw that rhe mlllehhihm whieh rhe New Seh wlll
Christ: bring includes the material benefits of the physical object,
a new sun. And this is of prime importance, as we learn
It has been remarked thousands of times that when the image of Master Malrubius asks Severian "which does
Christ died under torture. Many of ue have read humanity ¤eed_m0re? Justice and peace? Or a New Sun?"
so often that he was a "humble carpenter" that Severlen replleei
we feel a little surge of nausea on seeing the _ _ _ _
words yet again. But no One ever seems te when a client is driven to the utmost extremity,
notice that the instruments of torture were ir ie Wemth ehe feed ehe eeee rrom Pain he
wood, nails, and a hammer, that the man who wants. Peace and justice come afterward. (Ch.
built the cross was undoubtedly a carpenter too; 3l' PP· 246“247' Ge)
that the man who harmxered in the nails was as _ _ _ _ _
mueh a carwnter as e seldier, es meh e earnen_ Severian had earlier expressed his vision of the peace and
ter as a tortureß Very few eeem even to have justice which will follow. Renouncing the torturer's guild
noticed that airneugn cnrisr was a ··h„mb1e Car- for geed; ee be deee when he leevee Threx Mi Velume T¤ree·
penter," the only object we are specifically SeVerlah lmeglhee werlde where peeple
told he made was not a table or a chair, but a .
whip· treated one another as brothers and sisters,
And it Christ knew net Only the Pein er worlds where there was no currency but honor, .
torture hut the nein er heine e tertnrer (ee it . . in which the long war between mankind and
seems certain to me that he did) then the dark the beeete "ee ¤¤¤e¤ed he mere' (eh' le' pp'
figure is also capable of being a heroic and lel”le2' SL)
äeljgeda igoäfyriääeuröheilääeeeoégen Iäaiälcggtsts 'Ihis is the Christian peaceable kingdom, ruled by love, com-
passion, and the connectedness of all creation.
The concept of "taking on the sins of the world" develops _welfe·S e¤“pleX' ‘·’hei·iehee' FPÖ hheeheiIheheel’ vet
more meaning when we imagine Christ suffering not only from emeelehelly hewerfhl' ehnehleh Vleleh gives hle tetralogy
the sins of others but from his own sins. Severian, who hhltY and eerleheheee ef phrpeee°
begins by representing death, becomes a vivimancer, one who has ehe llterery ehe theelegleei eeeehgeheeeereee FO lee
brirgs life. TO understand the value er lire anti te dis- predecessors written by those British Christian writers:
cover eternal ideas of what is good, Severian needs to un- Telklem Meh°hele' hewle' ehe eheeeehtem .
krstand death and evii_ _ Three of these four are best known for their fan-
Wolfe makes clear that Severian is a Christ—figure: eeS1eS' ehe euch lirerarY geheelegy ehggeete hhy there hee
he raises the dead and is himself raised from the dead in beeh eehfheieh ehem; whether the te$rel<>¤¥ le fehteey er
Volxmse One when struck by the avern, he turns water into eeiehee fj·et?°h' Wolfe himself eelle lt "eelehee fehteeyhl
wine and is compared to a carpenter or a fisherman, and he whleh he eeflhee es e eeerY whlehz
suffers spontaneous bleeding as if from a crown of thorns in _ . . .
Volume Two, sees himself as both a child and a man and ¤eeS ehe meehe, ef eelehee eeeehleve the Spine
Speculates that he has been given "the attribnteg, Of life ef fä¤€äSY· Llké fantasyr 5C1if}C€ f<'=“j€ö$ic f@5@S
and light" that will belong to the renewed sun in the fourth ehe"' ehe efteh ehehhee meh' lhpeeelble Cree-
volume (Ch.4, p. 277, CA). Because we also understand that three ehe <>¤¤e<=¤e,· ° ' .° ehe lt Ueee ehe
Severian will bring the New Sun (though the tetralogy ends mleleheeeregy ef S°le“°e fleelehbiie ähew thgf
before we know for sure), we know that he is the New Sun, tbeee thlhge ehe het ehly eeeel e ue pre
the Conciliator reborn. 'I‘he legends told of the Conciliator a e°(e)
make clear that he was Christ, and the Conciliator is
96 97
His notion of a suitable Chist fiure, the tortuer
veian, also eveals MOlfe'5 lex and surprising faith.
In m_e Castle of the Otter, tblfe illwninates his idea f
Christ:
It has n emaked thousands of times that
Christ died under torture Many of us have read
so often that he was a ''hwnble cante'' that
feel a little surge of nausea on seeing the
words yet again. But no one eve seems to
notice that the instuments of toture wee
woOd, nails, and a hammer; that the man who
built the cs was undoubtedly a canter t;
that the n o hred in the nails was as
nuch a carpenter as a soldie, as ch a can-
ter as a torturer Very few seem even to have
noticed that althOugh Chcist was a ''hle car-
pente,'' the only Object we are specifically
tod he made was not a table oc a chair, but a
whip
And if Chist knew not only e pain of
torture but the ain of i a tortrer (as it
s certain to that he did) then the dark
fire is also capab3e of being a heoic and
even a holy figure, lîke the bíack Chists
rved in Ærica. (''Helicope,'' p l0, CO)
me conpt of ''taXirq on the sins of the world'' develops
Iare ani en igirR Chist suffeing not only fr
the sins of others but r his own sins Seveian, whO
begins by representing death, beaes a viiJnancer, om whO
brirqs life To understand the value of life and to dis-
cove eternal idea of at is good, verian s to un-
nta ath a evil.
lfe kes clear that Seveian is a Christ-figurei
he raises the dead end is hin6elf raised fran the dead n
l when struck b the aven he turns wate intO
wi and is r to a canter or a fishennan, a h
sufen sntanes bleediq as if f a cram Of Orn in
Volu o, sees hielf as both a child and a man and
speculates that he has en given ''e attrites of life
and light^ that will belong to the rewed sun in e f
l (Ch.4, p 277, Ch). Because also understand at
hverian will bri the Mew Sun (though the tetralOgy eS
befoe kn for sute), knm that he is the Mew Sun,
the Cmciliator ebo. me legends told O the Conciliat Of
make clear that he wa5 Chri5t, and the ConciliatOr iS

_,
reatedly inked tO the Yew Sun me ciccle Of assia-
ti'ons is clete; Seveian, the nciliatOr, the Mew Sun
and Chri5t.
knm that the millennium which the Mew Sun will
briq includes the teial nefits o the physical Object,
e new sun. And this s Of pi irtan, as learn
en the image O maste Malrubius asks Severian ''ich s
hnity nd TTare? ustice and peace? Or a ew Sun'
verian replies;
when a client is driven to the utnDst extremity
it is wath a {oad and ease fan pain he
wants Peace and 7ustice afteard. (Ch.
3l, pp. 246-247, Ch)
seveian had earliec expressed his vision Of the peace and
3'ustice wihich will foll. Renouncirq the tOrturer's ild
for good, as he s when he leaves mrax in VOlune m,
vian inagines lds where pele
treated one anothe as bOthers and sisters
lds Where thee was no curency but hOnOr .
.. in ich the l war between mankind and
the beasts was pusued no rae, (Ch l3, pp.
lOl-l02, sL)
mis is the Christian aceabe kirqd, l bY lOve, -
passion, and the connectedness of all cati On.
tblfe's lex, unclichd, and unsentimental, yet
emotionally pmerful, Christian visim gives his tetaly
unity a serisness of puse, me k Of the Sun
has the literary ard theological strength acrd tO its
predesrs itten by those British Christian WriteSi
TOlkien, mcnald, Tewis, and ChestekOn.
Three of these four are best known fOr their fan-
taties, a such litera geneal sugge5t5 why then has
en confugion about whether the tetralY is fantasY Or
Sciena fiction lfe hielf calls it ''scien fantasY,'
i he de{ig as a stofy which
use6 the ang of gcien tO aie e Sitit
of fantasy. ike antasy, xience fanty reStS
un, a often ands with, ''isible'' cea-
tures and ob7ects. . . . But it uses the
methodol of science ficti On tO shm that
tse thims ae not onl ssible but prOb-
8ble. (6
97

So Wolfe has butterfl 0 le, iants and floatin islands -
to make his story seerä mägi-::al, (äout helexplains howgthey are ’ 30 Jan' l?83' l"2' 11*
probable. Nevertheless, there is more of the "spirit of the New gänaß., wnehwolfa Talks about Tha Book Of
fantasy" in The Book: its use of a quest story, its archaic 12LB ll' 30 Jam
terms, the archetypal figures, and finally, the religious ' p' ’ , _
theme, which relies on faith rather than proof, on the un— (2) G€ril(;,.JOnaS’ rev' er T a Clt¤¤@l Of the Autarcm E
seen rather than the seen. Wolfe chose "science fantasy" ' 22 May ¥98a' p' 15*
rather than fantasy for his story, however, to show that (3) I lr Asaar ?S' r_aV' #
such faith is "not only possible but probable." MÖY 1983r P-
The Book of the New Sun may be tricky to categorize in ° . . .
a specific way, but it was written by a man who made his (4) SQCQPÖ COrmthlÜanS’ ch' 4’ V' l8° .
reputation as a science—fiction writer and was published as (5) Fqag. og oa' in Iatervlaw with Gene Wolfe,
a science-fiction series (through Simon and Schuster's (6) atU“£€§,hl98;’ p' „ .
"Timescape" imprint). Whether science fiction, fantasy, or 1980 lg ey aam E" Aug-
science fantasy, the books come within the provence of the ’ p' °
subculture, science fiction. Why is this significant? It
has long been a dream of science-fiction writers, readers,
and fans that a work of great literature would arise within
their subcultural genre. I speculate that The Book of the
New Sun is a realization of that dream. It has the depth,
richness, and excitement to be The Book of Gold, to be a
lasting, luminous, and illuminating work of art. Time will
tell.
Is The Book of the New Sun Wolfe‘s best work? It is
certainly his most sustained piece of fine writing. But he
is also a master of the short story and the novella, and
some of those are, I believe, equally fine--especially
"Seven American Nights"—though they do not have, are not
meant to have, the scope of a four-volume series of novels.
Is the tetralogy the climax to Wolfe‘s career? Again, time
will tell. He has the prospect of many years of writing and
growth ahead of him.
NOTES
(1) Colin Greenland, rev. of The Shadow of the Torturer
and The Claw of the Conciliator, Foundation, Feb.
1982, pp. 82-85. Elizabeth Hall, rev. of The Book of
the New Sun, Extraglation, 23, No. 3 (1983), pp. 270-
274. Algis Budrys, rev. of The Shadow of the Tor-
turer, Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, May
1980, pp. 26-27; rev. of The Claw of the Conciliator,
Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, June 1981,
pp. 48-51; rev. of The Sword of the Lictor, Magazine
of Fantasy and Science Fiction, April 1982, pp. 25-29;
and rev. of The Citadel of the Autarch, Magazine of
Fantas and Science Fiction, April 1983, pp. 43-46.
John Clute, rev. of The Citadel of the Autarch,
_______ ___
5o lfe has buttecfly peope, giants, and floating islands
to make his story seem gical, but he explaiM h they are
prble. veheless, there is more of the ''spiit of
fantasy'' in me its use of a quest sto, its archaic
tes, the archetypal figues, and finally, the eigious
thene, Which relies on fai rather than prf, on e un-
seen rathe than the sn, t3olfe chose ''scienOe fantasy''
rather than fantasy for his story, howeve, to shm that
such faith is ''not only sibe but proble'
me k Of the Yew Sun may tricky to categOize in
a spec_ific way, but it was written by a man o nede his
reputation as a science-fition writec and was publish as
a science-iction series (though Simon and Schuster's
''Tine' sca'' iqrintj Mhethe science fiction, fantasy, or
science antasy, the ks caTe within the pr Ovence O the
subcultue, science fiction My is this significant? It
has 3o n a dream oE sciencefiction wTiters, eaders,
and faM that a work of gceat liteatue ld arise within
eir subcultual gene. I sculate that me k Of the
w Sun is a realization of that deam. It ha the depth,
richness, and excitem,ent tO be 'me k Of ld, tO a
lasting, lLmins, and illinati wok of art Ti will
tell
Ts e Book o the Yew Sun Molfe ' s st rk It is
rtainly his cat sustained piece of fine writing t he
is al5o a master of the sh3rt stOry and the vella, and
so o those are, I be3ieve, equally fine--especially
Seven Ameican Nights''though they do t have, an t
ant to have, th sco of - frvol series Of vels.
Is e tetralo9y the clix t,o lfe's ? Again, t'
will tell, He has the prpect of many yeas o{ writing a
mth ahead Of hJm'.
l) Colin Greenland, nv. of me Shadow of the TOturer
ard The Clew of the Conciliato, Foundati On, Feb
l982_, . 82-85 Elith Hall, re_v. of me k of
the Sun, Extra00lation, 23, , 3 (l983), 270-
274. Algis Budrys, rev, of _The Shadm of e TOr-
tur, 0azi o ans and Scien FictiOn, aY
80, . Z6-2 '; rev. of me Claw of the nciiatOr,
_00i Of Fntas and Scien Ficti On, Ju l98l,
. 48-5l; rev. of me Srd of the rictOr, i
_of Fantas and Xien_ Fiction, April l982, pp 25-29i
a v of me Cidel o the Autarch, a a2ine Of
Fantas and_scien Fiim, April l983, . 43-46
o n C ute, tev. o Thg Citadel of the Autarch,

__FGel9tcngteoonplRfeev3tewnmla_stDo m ely98mleapn s7t T_he n3rter Au9t
l83, p. ll.

IX . New York: Simon and Schuster,
1981. Second volume of the tetralogy, The Book of the
COMPLETE ANNUTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY OF FICTION NeW Sun. ·fI"‘—"—‘
CITED gy FIRST [gDiTi()N_g "Continuing WeStwarC]." In Orbit 12. Eid. Damon Knight. New
THROUGH 1933 York: Putnam, 1973, pp. 204-209. A time paradox
story set in North Africa.
"The Adopted Father." Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction "A Criminal Proceeding." In Interfaces. Ed. Ursula K.
Magazine, Dec. 1980, pp. 117-125. The isolated child hoooln and Virginia Kidd. Acg, igggl pp.
meets an ieeieted father. 107-214. Takes the televising of courtroom proceed—
"Against the Lafayette Escadrille." In Qigain Dangerous Vi- ingo be a bizarre extreme.
sions. Ed. Harlan Ellison. Garden City, NY; "C¤e5·°° In Ed_ Roqer EiwOed_ New
Doubleday, 1972, pp. 129-131. Second of three stories York: Dodd Mead, 1973, pp. 145-150, ipin entertainment
published as "Mathoms from the Time Closet" (with aboot Comedians and aliens.
··RebOtS Steryu end ··LOCe parehtiy): dnpiicating the "The Dark of the June." In Continuum 1. Ed. Roger Elwood.
past brings it beek_ New York: Putnam, 1974, pp. 158-165. First of four
"Alien Stones." In Orbit ll. Ed. Damon Knight. New York: oohhootoo Continnnhi Stories (with "The Death of Hyio,“
Putnam, 1972, pp. 7-43. Alien linguistics and in- “FroYh the Notebook of Dr. Stein," and “Thag··), this is
verted science—fiction conventions. aboot a rnnaway girl.
"An Article About Hunting." In Saving Worlds. Ed. Roger who Dead Mahr, EL: oCt· 1965, pp. 13, 61-62, woireS
Eiwoed and Virginia Kidd_ Garden City, Ny; H first published story, a ghost story about India.
Denhiedew 1.973, erh 93_i03_ Ah eeeiegy Story from The Death of Doctor Island." In Universe 3. Ed. Terry
the point Of View Or a bnreancraih Carr. New York: Random House, 1973, pp. 3-69.
"Beautyland." In Saving Worlds. Eid. Roger Elwood and Vir— Soooho ot the °°1S1and bf DOCtor Death" trilogy (with
gihia Kidri_ Garden City, NY: Donbieneyl ic)73, pn_ ::The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories" and
i83_i88_ Another eeeiegy Story, from the point er The Doctor of Death Island"), a Nebula Award winner
View gf 3 degtroyer, H with an adolescent isglato,
"Beech Hi11.“ In Infinity Three. Ed. Robert Hoskins. New The Death af hY1e·°° In COntinuum 2. Ed. Roger EiwOOd_
York; Lancer, 1972, pp, 84-91. A man escapes his New rorkz Putnam, 19174, pp. 181-188. Secgnd in the
shabby life for a vacation in which fantasies are Series (With "The Dark of the Jone,“ “FrOm
iived Out. the Netebook of Dr. Stein," and *Thag··); the rather
"The Blue Mouse." In Many Worlds of SF. Ed. Ben Bova. New „Th Sooks hle danQh'Cer·
York: Duttonl ·—·-[971, pr)_···*""“6_22_ A future war Story e Detective ot Dreams." In Dark Forces. Eid. Kirby
with uncharacteristic emphasis on technology. Mocahloi/· NeW York: Viking, 1980, pp. 196-213, A
"Car Sinister." The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fic- Th Ihokohslon tale with a Chrietian theme.
tion, Jan. 1970, pp. 57-63. A punning entertainment. · ChiCaQO= Follett, 1976. An adoieg-
„„rh€ C-—-—hangeiing_,. in Orbit 3_ Ed_ Demon Knight New yerki "Th Cent historical novel with a religious theme,
Berkley, 1968, pp. 109-123. The isolated child in a 6 Doctor of Death 1S1and"
story which presages the novel Peace., ·" Ed- Jack Dann. New York;
"Cherry Jubilee." Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine, harhor and ROW, 1978, pp. 57-110. Third in the
19 Jan. 1982, pp. 108-135. A science-fiction mystery Islahd ot D¤<=¤¤r Death" Series (with "The Island of
with twihS_ Doctor Death and Other Stories" and "The Death of Doc-
The Citadel of the Autarch. New York: Simon and Schuster, „Eyeb€toE IS1and°°)_: With an adult isolato.
1982. Fourth volume of the tetralogy, The Book of the m' Ih___‘Eh.£l· Ed- Damen Knight. New York: Put-
New Sum -··""’“"' ham, ,1970, pp. 67-78. Examining the nature or
"Civis Laputus Sum." In Qystopian Visions. Ed. Roger El· nine E“mäh1tY through robots-
wood. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1975, pp- yefiash Mlraclesß Ih · Ed- Gardner
have been bUrned_ Pp- 175-250. A novella with a transcendent isolato.
100 101
_lf ___ ____
TX
a P LeT F, .4TED IBLI 0 HY O FICI
CITED BY IRST DITT OM S
OU GH l383
''The Adopted Father.'' Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction
maazi e, c l980, pp. l37-l25. The isolated child
ets an isOlat ed athe
''ainst the Lafayette Escadrille.'' In 0aain Danaerous Vi-
sions. Ed. Halan Ellison. Carden City, NY:
bleday, l972, pp. l29-l3l Seco nd of thee stoies
published as ''mathoms fom the Time Closet'' (vith
''Robot's Stor1'' an '' Loc o Raenti5'') duplicating the
pa st bi rq s it ba ck
''Alien Stones.'' In Orbit ll Ed. n M ight, ew Yock:
Putnam, l972, pp, 7-43. Alien Jirquistics and in-
vet ed cien ce -fiction conventions
An Article A bo ut Hunting'' Tn Sa ' WO lds. Ed. R og er
Elwood an Viinia Kidd. Gacden City, Y:
ubleday, l973, pp. 93-l03. An ecology sto r an
the po int of view of a bureauccat.
''autyland.'' In Sa i Wolds. Ed. Roger El and Vir-
ginia Kidd. Gar de n City, NY bleday, l973, pp
l83-l88 Anathe ecology stocy, an the int Of
vi m of a destoye,
''Beech Hill'' Tn I fi it mee. Ed Robert Hoskins, Mew
Yok: ance, l972, pp, 84-93. A n escas hi5
shabby life fo a vacation jn which fantasies ae
lived out
'''he Blue Mou se.'' In Man Morlds o S Ed. Ben va. Mew
York: tton, l97l, pp. 6-2. A future wa sto ry
with uncharacteristic ehasis on technolo9y
''Car Sinister.'' _The Ma0a2ine of Fantas and Science Fic-
tion, Jan l970, pp. 57-63. A punning entertai nne nt.
''me Changeling.'' In Orbit 3. Ed. aara n Might Mew YOrk
Be kley, l968, . lU9-l23. m e isolated child in a
sto which presages the novel ace
''Chec 3 ub ilee,'' _saac As v!s Science ^icti On Ma azine,
l9 Jan. l982, . l08-l35. A scien ce -ficti m myste
with twins.
m e Citadel of the Au tach. E3e w York: S ' n a nd Schuste,
l982. F h vol of the tetaly m_e ? of the
Yew Sun.
''Civis La utus S .'' In D sto0i?n Visions Ed. R Og e El-
. Engle Cliffs, J: Prentice Hall, l975, pp
6-54. m Ob D' k on a fl ti iland afte the kS
have bee n buned.
lOO

_l ______t ________
m_e Caw ot the COnciliator, mew Yr!; rT0n and Schuste,
l98l, SecOnd vOl o the tetalogy, m_e k Of the
Mew Sun.
continuing Mestad.'' In Orbit l2. Ed. n Kn ight. Mew
York: Putnam, l973, pp. 204-209. A tine paradOx
sto set in Yoth N rica.
"A Criminal POceeding.'' In Interfaces. Ed. Ursula K.
Le Cuin and Virinia Kidd, Yew York: Ace, l980, pp.
l07-2l4. Takes the televising of cout pr Oc eed-
i ng s to a bizarre extre .
"cues.'' In me Far Side oE Ti. Ed. Rer Elw . Yew
York: d mead, 973, pp. l45l50. An entertai nt
a bo ut c dians and aliens.
"The Da rk of the June.'' Tn Continu 1. Ed. R og e El .
Yew York3 Ru tn , l974, pp. 158-l65. Fist o fou
connected Continuwn stories (with ''me Death af Hyle,''
''Fr the mote boo k uf Dr. Stein,'' and ''mag''), this is
about a runaway girl.
''me ad man.'' Sir, Oct. l965, pp. l3, 6-62, MOlfe's
first ublish ed story, a ghost stO a bo ut India.
''The Death of Docto Island.'' In Universe 3. Ed, Teccy
Ca. Yew York: Rand House, l973, pp. 3-69.
Se nd of the ''Island of toc ath'' tril y (with
''me Tsand of ctor Death and Other Stoie5'' and
''me ctr of Death Tsland"), a Mebula Award winner
with an adolescent isolatO.
me Death of HyJe.'' In Continuum ?. Ed, Roge lwOOd.
Mew York: Pu tn am, l9l7Q, pp. lYl-l8Y. Seco nd in the
Continu series (with ''me k of the 3une,'' ''Fran
the ote k o Dr. Stein,'' and ''Thag''): the fathe
seeks his daughte.
The De tective ot Dreams.'' In Dark Forces. d, Kirby
m cC auley. Mew York: Viking, l980, pp . l96-2l3 A
Dickensian tale with a Christian the .
me vil in a Foe5t. Chicago: Follett, l976. An adoles-
cent historical novel with a eligi Ous the .
me tor of ath Island.'' n I TTnD rtal; Short vcls Of
the Tansh n ture.'' Ed. Jack Dann. Mew YOrk
Harer and Row, l978, pp. 57-llO. Third in the
''Island o to Death'' series (with ''me sland Of
tor ath and Other Stories'' a ''me ath Of -
tO Islan''), with an adult i latO.
em.'' In Orbit 7. Ed. n Might Mew ork: t-
nam, l970, pp. 67-78. Examining the nature o
h lma nity though o ts.
The Eyeflash miracles." n uture power. Ed. Gardner
tois and Jack nn. Mew York; Rand an HOuse, l976
pp. l75-250. A novella wi th a ta M cendent isolato.
lOl

| ' ·lI _ ' II I
[Feather Tlgere In Egg (I w Zealand Quereeel )' Feel 'The Green Wall Said. New Worlds, Aug. 1967, pp. 26-27.
Winter 1973, pp. 52-56. Adorable yet sinister alien . -———-— .
invaders and the effect of the mind on the world Cmssed ¤¤44444¤444444¤¤4 am the Value ef hUmemey'
around it "The Headless Man." In Universe 2. Ed. Terry Carr. New
mrnn Fifth Henn Of Cerbernsn, In Orbit 10. Ed, Damon ä;1nL};nyAce, 1972, pp. 211-218. A grotesque man finds
Kmghe New York: PUteem’ 1972f. pp' 9-79° „A COmme— ··The Hero as Werwolf." New Improved Sun. Ed. Thomas Disch.
of-age story that begins The bifth Head of Cerberus New YOrk_ Harper 182 200 Twisted
novella cycle. . L . . .’ ’ ° . _ ‘
The Fifth Head of Cerberus. New York: Scribners, 1972. äälägsftey 44¤44¤¤ eenveetlene te exemme the nature ef
Contains "The Fifth Head of Cerberus," "'A StOry,' by , ° ., .
John V. Marsch," and "V.R.T," a novella cycle which The HORARS Of war' In ———& l' Ed' Harry Harrleem New
made a strong contribution to Wolfe‘s reputation as a Yoek:. DelaCerte’ 19-/O' pp' 82-lol' A wer Story ex-
Crnftsmnn amining the nature of humanity through the use of
' . . ndroids.
"Fo1ia‘s Story: The Armiger‘s Daughter." Amazing, Nov. „ a T „ . . .
198% pp- 44-54- 0*76 Of 4444 44444>€4.444 $44:4445 44 '“°“’„°;€„ YÄESF E§§§5“ F§$§“pp 'i%,.€‘$E'““S„EiSEE-
Citadel of the Autarch (her real name is Foila). wenn Corporntions and rnéiCnlS' ' '
"Forlesen." In Orbit 14. Ed. Damon Knight. New York: „ f An „ ‘
Harper and Row, 1974, pp. 160-200. Kafka-esque Heueeho dl.eeet?r;; gingen? 1968é pp' lOl”l20‘ 7444 early
. an ing o e arc 1 ec ure o memory.
I, bureaucfat ln e Sur-real workedaw _ h "How I Lost the Second World War and Helped Turn Back the
Four Wolves. Amazing, May 1983, pp- 79 84. A story t at German Invasion __ Anal May 1973 pp 83-95 An
··, Ü? %i5f’°§§ ä§‘i„é’§‘ä“‘i’,.‘£€.T:-—····‘“‘? “°$§.°$.§§S:,'Ü§“.€“§g„- 444<44*¤444 w¤r4<4 4¤¤4‘¤”72g‘44m44¤¤—
rom G . . . "How the Whip Came Back. In Orbit 6. Ed. Damon Knight.
tasy and Science Fiction, June 1983, pp. 117-121. An New YO!_k_ Pntnnm 1970-;-55-74 The effect On
epistilary werewolf entertainment. h . ' ' ' ‘ ° „ _
unrom the Notebook Of Dr. Stninß In Continunmjn Sgnity and humaneness of the master/slave relation
Roger elwOOd' New. York: Plutnemä l9lg4' pp' 3 _ ' "In Looking-Glass Castle." Triggarterly 49. Fall 1980, pp.
Third in the Continuum series (with The Dark of the ll7_l29 The war between men and women taken
June," "The Death of Hyle," and "Thag"), this with a literallgl
disturbed and possessed girl. ·Th I ° - „ .
Gene Wolfe‘s Book of Days. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, G ääaniaäinmfntsitwetgnéngogieer ;:;&;‘eS‘l97ä“
1981. Collection of short fiction which contains: 217. First ig tne „ISland nf DOCtOI’D9nth'„ psnvnlla
"HOW the whip Came Beek'" Hof Relaye and ROSQSNI series (with "The Death of Doctor Island" and “T‘ne
"Pa‘·‘l'S Treehoueew net' Breneemu neeeutylandw "Car Doctor of Death Island"): the isolato is a child
einieterßl "The Blue Mouse} HHOW I Lost ehe Second The Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other
world war and Back tee _ee¤“en ,InVaSle“'" "Th? Stories. New York: Pocket, 1980. Short fiction col-
Aeeptee Fether" °FOr}e?en’ An ertlC}€,,abOlflt Hur]; lection containing: "The Island of Doctor Death and
· u n ' I '
gie? Ehe §han%e¥Y;g’ „ ,„P'§]r;y€M?d?EiäC{;i]' S iiilgääeg E Other Stories," "A1ien Stones," "La Befana," "The Hero
„ä,h;yew§§ Biiiaréh eghe Tr;9 „ „La Bgéanan, arid äs lgerwolf," "Three Fingers," "The Death of Doctor Is-
' I IIF T ' II HH f T t II (I T k '
"Melemg". . . . . Songl," "älie efloy lääeiter 'f)Le:ThCe Dof:\t;3>r,of Deiaizii
"The God and His Man." Isaac As1mov's Science F~1ct1O¤ land'., „CueS  ,-1-he Eyefllash Miracles  and useven
Magazine, Feb. 1980, pp. 20-25. Written in a Biblmäé American Nights „ '
. « I *
ä_;Y]—;;O;hl? äleäräeglggä be an ¤44@¤¤4”>7 ef the Urth O TUS Very C1ean." In Generation. Ed. David Gerrold. New
··G¤ing £,.,c.Se Ed Roger Eiwood. New ffjrki D@44¤¤¤jh· 4972·lr>r>· 77-78- Wm is real 4¤d
° -.——-—° ' 0 is not in e sexua arena.
Ycgrlä HaF‘5erea;;iRln;wé %ä7@nlg?;iOägä;;;2inet:2;nn:\;);: "K€Vi¤ Malone." [In New Terrors. Ed. Ian Campbell. London:
O d unäenedy X Pan,'l980, pp. 173-184. An iso1ato's search for home
an an fol ' feqtures unwitting actors.
102 103
_ll ___ ___ __ t
''Feather Tigers'' Tn Ed e ( Mew Zealand Quarterl ), Fal-
Winter l973, p. 52-56. Adoable yet sinister alien
invaders and the efect of the mind on the world
a nd it.
The Fith Head Of Cerberus'' In Orbit lO. Ed. Damon
Kni9ht, Mew YOrk Pu tnam, l972, 9-79. A c an ing
of-age stOry that begins T _e t^ifth Head of Cerbe s
novella cyc3e,
me Fifth Head of Cerbe rust ew York: Scribners, l972.
Contains ''me Fifth Head o Ce s,'''''A So,' b
Jn V. Marsch,'' and ''V,R.T,'' a novella cycle which
na de a strOng cOntribution to 1fe's reputation as a
cat n.
FOlia's StOry me Ann iger's Daughter.'' Am azin, Yov.
l982, pp. Q8-54 One o the e mb edd ed stoies o
Citadel of the Autarch (he rea n is Foila)
Forlesen'' In Orbit l4. Ed Damon Knight. Yew York:
Harpe and Ro, 974, pp, l60200t Kafka-esque
bureauccat in a surreal work ay.
Four Molves.'' Amain , ma y l9Y3, pp, 79-84. A story that
y be a ut the writing of m e k o the Mew Sun.
F the sk Of Gi r C. merto _n.'' m e maaa2i ne of Fan-
tas a nd Sc ien ce Fiction, June l983, pp. ll7-l2l. m
eplstlla we re l entetai nt,
'Fr the Motebook of Dr. Stein.'' In Continu 3. Ed
R og e Elw . w York Pu tn , l9l74, pp. l37-l4
m i in th e Continu series (wi ''The o the
June,'' ''m e ath of Hyle,'' and ''m ag''), th is with a
distur bed and po ssess ed girl.
Ge ne Molfe's Ok of Da , Carden City, Y: bledaY,
98l Collection Of shOrt iction which contains
''How the Whip Came Ba ck,'' ''Of Relays and Roses''
''Raul's Treeh ou se,'' ''St, 8randon,'' '' autyland,'' ''Car
Sinister,'' ''The Blue mse,'' ''H I t the Sec Ond
World Ma and Tu rn ed Ba ck the Ge nna n Invasion,'' "The
Adopted Father,'' ''Forlesen,'' ''m Art ile aut Hunt-
ing,'' ''me Changeling,'' ''Many Mansions,'' ''ainst the
Laayette Escadrille,'' ''Three million Sare miles,''
''The Mar Benea th the Tree,'' ''La Befana,'' and
'' l t i r3g. ''
The GO d and His Man.'' Isaac Asimovs S'cience Ficti O
a az' ne , Feb, l980, pp. 20-25. Written in a Biblica
style, is sto might an allego of e Urth Of
me k of Me Mew Sun,
GOi to the Beach'' In Shcase. Gd. R oge El , V
YOrk; Ha r a rd R m, l973, pp. l65-72. m e nature
of humanity examined in relationships be tween h
and android,
l02

_H _ _____ _
me Green Mall Said.'' Mew Morlds, Aug. l967, pp 6-27,
Crosse cunications and the value of hwnanity.
me Headless Man.'' In Universe 2. Ed. Ter Carr. Mew
York: Ace, l972, pp. 2ll-2l8. A grotesque Tnan find5
cany.
me Hero as Menxolf.'' ew 3 0roved Sun. Ed. Ths Disch,
Mew YOrk: Harper and R, l975, pp. l82-200. TWisted
sciencefictiOn cOnventions to examine the nature Of
hnity.
''me S O Mar.'' In Mova 1. Ed. Harry Harrison. Yew
York: lacOe, l970, pp. 82-lOl. A wac story ex-
amining the natue of humanity through the use Of
androids.
"Hour of Tust.'' In Bad moon Risina. Ed. Ths Disch.
Mew YOrk Harper and Rm, l973, pp. l67-22. War -
ten cOrpoations and radicals.
"Hse of mcetors.'' IF, June l968, pp. lOl-l20. An early
handing Of the rchitectue o ETAD,
^H I LDst the cor3d rld War and Helped Turn Back the
Gen Tnvasion.'' al , may l973, . 83-95. An
altenate world entertaiMnent.
''H the Mip C Back.'' n Obit 6. Ed. n Knight,
Mew York: Putnam, l970, pp. 55-74. me effect On
hnity and hneness of the ste/slave relati On-
ship.
In irqlass Caste.'' Tri0 arterl 49. Fall l980, pp.
ll7-l29. The war between men and women taken
literally.
me Island of tor ath and Othef Stories.'' n Orbit 7.
Ed. n Knight. Mew Yok: Putnam, l970, pp. l99-
2l7, Fint in the ''3sland of DoctOr Death'' nOvella
series (with ''The Death of Doctor sland'' and ''me
tor of Death Tsland'') the isolatO is a child.
The Island of ctor Death and Other Stories and Other
StOries. Mew ork: Pket, l980. ShOrt ficti On l-
lection containing: ''e Island Of to ath and
Othef Stories , '' ''Nien Stones, '' ''La fana , '' ''The HerO
s lf," "m Fingers,'' ''The ath of- tor Is-
land,'' ''Feather Tigers,'' ''Hour o Trust,'' Tracking
SOng,'' ''The Toy Theater,'' ''The tOr OE ath Is-
land,'' ''Cue5,'' ''The Eyeflash Miracles," and ''Seven
ican Mights. ''
t'S Very Clean.ll 3n neation. Ed. David Gefold. Mew
YOrk: lacoe, l972, p. 73-78. MO is real and
O is not, in e sexual aena.
Vin lone." n ew Teros. y. an Canpll. London..
Pan, l980, pp._l73-l84. ilatos search fo h
ires unitting actors.
l03

1 .
·-King Under the Mountain.-- g, Nov./Dec. 1970, pp. 66-90. f-P-HSP-C nf-Sr OP Arsemt am Old -?=-C9- „ h N
A personal relationship between a man and a Cpnpntar, --Paul'S Treehouse- In ggg;. Ed- Degen Kglg te eg
--La ßerana.-- Galaxy, Jan. 1973, pp. 72-76. An Italian Y<>-¤*<= P-P-7a-“· 19695 PP- H9? · are" S an
Christmas legend travels to the future on another Chlleren during the Coming revelutlom „ .
planet. peace. New York: Harper and Row, 1975. Wolfe s mainstream
"Last Day." In Speculations. Ed. Issac Asimov and Alice _ h°Yer In träe ärm Oro; mexeär Xägsvggbedeäd Sggggsseb
Laurence. Boston: Houghton Mifüin, 1982, pp, 135- --periton1 1s- n . .
139- The relationship b€tW99I’1 hU.mBl’]S and I'[\aChi[’1@S, wood; New York: Mämlllönr pp' 65-7l° Fran
"The Last Thrilling Wonder Story." Isaac Asimov's Science the Vrewpilnt er tne gemS' . F. _
Fiction Magazine, June 1982, pp. 144-169. A metafi-c—— --The Reeerd-n9·_
tional conversation between author and square—jawed _Q9.h.- -ävr-1 MHZ- ep' 9-/"l 1 An O "Üen. rem .
hero. his childhood selfishness without gaining selt-
"loco Parentis." In gain, Dangerous Visions. Ed. Harlan khr’”leege' .
~ · I “ _ ht- New
Ellison. Garden City, NY: Doubleday 1972 pp. 132- 'Remen-bw-Cs W CG-6- I-LQQEJ: Ed· Da“‘°“ Km? _
133_ Third ef three Stories publisged ae, ·MarhomS York: ' Putnam, 1970, pp. 40-53. A professor in a
from the Time Closet" (with "Robot's Story" and ?r°“St1en„f“tUre' „ V. . Ed Harlan
"Against the Lafayette Escadrille"): are parents °°RObOt S er°rY' In ' ° 2
' f ' ”> Ellison. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 19172, pp. 1 6-
machines or nurturing. „ . . „
"Many Mansions." In Orbit 19. Ed. Damon Knight. New York; 13-% First et three eterlee punllened es Lgfetnorgs
’—’°" - · from the Time Closet" (with "Against t e ayet e
Iatgurgi-; ggg Iääglsägggéräpef3;-Esägioiähe architecture Of Escadrille" and "Loco Parentis"): a boy who thinks
"The Marvelous Brass Chessplaying Automaton." In Universe heee e roher helle a Story about a man treated llke
7. Ed. Terry Carr. Garden City NY: Doubleday, 1977, N en ‘ „ . 5 Ed T C New
' _ 1l3_l33_ Home it h- S_ 'I‘he Rubber Bend. In Universe . . erry arr.
"Meltiää." In Orbit 15.n Erl/.Vä;r?:>n New York: Har— York: n‘and°"ehH°“ie’k lägärilegprll a rérgeagäl ac?)
per and Row, 1974, pp. 93-98. An evaporating time- Egääsjs @2 gilväf PC Y °
"A Methl:1v€BätCOi:n<t?I;3l'")a]I1r1yOrbit 8 Eid Damon Knight; New net- Brandon} Ih Garden eitY'
' T-—‘ ° ' - , - . I ' h t 1 —
York: Patnam, 1970, pp. 179-183. A method aetor in a ee%°"§;;?aI§;-aC;98l- PP 35 42 An es a 6 ex
.'°' “‘°““" f°" ""°"‘ the “‘°“e is reanr-" --S¤reen räeer.- J-lv -96%
"Mornlng Glory." In Alchemy and Academe. Ed. Anne McCaf— l4l_l44 A nOn_Scienee_fietien mystery Story
frey. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1970, pp. 170-177. ääeed On falee aeslmptione ,
Intelligence and therapy in people and plants. „SeV . . ~ ~ h
- - · . _ en American N1ghts." In Orbit 20. Ed. Damon Krug t.
"Mountains Like M1ce.' -Q“_, May 1966, pp. 81 Wolfe's New York: Harper and Rew————, 1978, oo_ 1-;5_233_ A com.
first published sc1ence—fict1on story, this is an in- plex novella about time, humanityl and enpathye
Iääätion story showing his characteristic interest ln The Shadw Of the Torturen New York: Simon and Schuster,
' _ , ' f th 1 ' ed tetralo
--0r Reiays and Roses.-- gg, Sept./Oct. 1970, pp. 161-170, äzäoeooghjf fQ§§tNe‘§’lg§§_° 6 acc am gy’
and 182. Computer matchmaking versus corporate ef' -Silh S Ed Robert Silverberq New
rieieneY- Q r?. n ’l"—°"@"”. 1;56 An 'solato ra les
New York: BerkleY- l970 welre'e riret §1?€’}i1.t,h;1a:;;:§:é;E7:eaFFty and h¤ma¤il1Y Q pp
ä1§;;dst;e;i3og§a1l,iSpuo1itieal science-fiction preaChi-"9 “Slave5 Qi Silver." IF, March/April 19-(l' PP- 68'83' First
. . ' , . k-rl ' t 'es featuring a robot
"O-lf N@lQhbOr, bjf QGVIÖ Copperfield." In Rooms of Paradise- gitxäesgäräsge asyeäg gg/§b;;lBend..)_
Ed' Lee eardmg° Melbourne: ’ l978' pp' 71- ”A Solar Labyrinth.-- 'Ihe Magazine of Fantasy and Science
" 83. A D].Ck€nSlaÜ '?al€ äbOUt' I[FSHBrlSm l Fiction, pp. 50_52_ A %I-gesian Haze.
The P;§‘;;rhe“[§€;‘e;*;‘;e<* 5;nCL--Y——;r‘“ät970I· ppm-leerer; Hesa "S<>¤yaTGäne Wessleman, and Kittee.-- In Orbit 6. sa.
. : r, , . — .
104 105
tttt ____ _ _
''Kirq Under the Mountain.'' IF, v./c. l970, pp. 86-9.
A pecsonal relationship between a man nd a computer
a Befana. '' Gala , Jan. l973 , pp, 72-76. m Italian
Chistmas egend travels tO the futue on anothe
planet.
st Day.'' In Speculations. . Tssac Asirav and Alice
urance. ston oughton mifflin, l982, pp l35-
l39. me relation5hîp between humans and chines
me st miling nder Sto.'' Tsaac Asiv' Science
Fiction Maaazine, June l982, pp_. 4Q-l69. A ITetafic-
tional cOnvecsati On between author and square-jawed
hero
O Parentis.'' In 0ain, Daners VisiOns. Ed Harlan
EllisOn. rden City, MY: ubleday, l972, pp. l32-
l33. mird of three stories Dublished as ''Mathoms
fr the TiTTe Closet'' (with ''RobOt 's Story'' and
Against the afayette Escadille ''): ae parents
nachines for nurturing?
''Xbny nsis,'' 3n Orbit l9. Ed n Knight. Ym ork:
Har and Rm, l977, pp. 355-44, me architectue of
ne a the strength of nostalgîa.
me 1Vlarvels Bass Chesslaying Autton.'' In Univer
7. Ed. Te Carr Garden City ; bleday, l977,
pp. ll3-l33. Hwnanity versus machines.
lting.'' n Orbit l5. Ed. n Knight. York: Har-
r and Rm, l974, pp, 93-98, An evaatirq t' -
travel cocktail paty.
''A Meth Bit in 'B. ' '' In Orbit 8, Ed. DanDn Knight. Mm
ork: Putnam, l970, pp. l79-l83. h nethod actO in a
'b' vie for wh the vie is reality.
^rning Glory." In Nchem and ad. . Anne M0f-
frey, Gaden City, Y: ubleday, l970, pp. l70-l77.
Tntelligence and theapy in peOple and plants,
''ntains Like Ftice.'' IF, May l966, pp, 8l-96. lfe's
ficst p0lished science-fiction sto, this is an inm
itiation stO shaxi his chaacteistic inteest in
nyth.
''Of Relays and Roses.'' 3F, pt./t. l97U, . l6l-70,
and l82. Computer matctmaking versus corate ef
iciency.
000ration ES. Mew York Bekley, l970. Molfe's fir5t
published novel, litical science-{iction preachn9
rug individualism.
~0ur Mei  bor,  b.' vid rfield.'' In R of Paradise
Ed. Lee Harding. melbour: a_et, l978, pp. 7l-
83. A DickeMian tale about nesnerism,
"me ackehaus eth. n Infi it I. Ed. RObert H'
kins, yew York, ancer, l970, pp, lll-ll7. a
l04

__t __ _____ _
utuistic twist on ''ksenic and Old Lace , ''
paul's Treehse.'' In Orbit 5, Ed, DamOn Knight. Yew
York: Putnam, l969, pp. l29-l37, Paents and
childen duirq the cing evolution
a. Mew York: Hac and R, l75. tNolfe's mainstream
novel in the fo o a ir with edded stoies.
itonitis,'' In Taaraw's Nternatives. Ed. Re El-
, Mew York: maillan, l973, pp. 65-7l F
the vieint of the germs ,
me Recording'' _me maa2ine of Fantas and Science Fic-
tion, Apil l97l2, pp. 97-300. m old n es
his childh selfishness withaut gainin sel-
naxledge.
"Rembrance to C,'' In Obit 6. n Might. w
Yok: Putnam, l970, pp, O-53, A pofesso in a
Pstian futue.
"Robot's Sto.'' In .aain, 0erous Visions. . Halan
Ellison, den City, MY: bleday, l9l72, pp l26-
l34. Fist oE thcee stories published as ''math Oms
fr the Ti Closet'' (with ''Against the Lafayette
Escadille'' and ''oco Raentis ''): a bOy whO thinks
he's a obot tells a sto aut a man teated like
One .
''me R0ber nd.'' Tn Univese 5. Ed. Tery Cac. ew
York: Randan House, J974, . J39-l63. Hwnans and
obots in a Sherlock Holmes mystery; a sequel tO
''Slaves of Silver. ''
St. Bandon.'' In Gene Molfe's k of s. rden City,
YY: bleday, 98l, pp. 35-42, An Tish tale ex-
ted Peace.
Screen Test.'' _Mike Shane's ste Ma0azine, uly l967,
pp, l4l-l44. A non-science-ficti On myste stoy
based m false asstions . -
Seven rican Mights.'' In bit 20. . Might.
Mew York: Ha and Rax_, l978, pp l75-233 A -
plex vella at t' , hnity, and ethy.
me S o the Tortuer. Mm York S' n and Schuste,
l980, me first vol of the acclaimed tetralOgy,
me k of the Mew Sun ,
Slhette." n Mew Atlantis, Y. Robet Silveberg. w
Yok: Hah_on, l975, pp. l-56. m isOlatO grapples
with the neani of eality and hwnanitY.
Slaves o silve." F, r/ril l97l, pp, 68-83. First
Of t Sherlk Mosian ysteries featuring a rt
, Mat9on (see elso ''me Rub '' 3 .
A SOlar abyinth. me Maazi of Fantas and Science
Ficti, ril l983, . 50-52. A rgesian e.
nYa_, Crane essleman, a Kittee.'' In Orbit 8. Ed.
l05

Damon Knight. New York: Putnam, 1970, pp. 86-91. A 130. A lonely boy and his rejected toys at Christmas.
„St lighäaäreamgnt Oäetfge natU§i7?§2gUm§lty' "westw1nd." E, July/Aug. 1973, pp. 110-117. The best;
raw; _..‘§X· am _ ' oo' · Young moroooaw leader for lonely people makes it a personal relation-
in an alternate medieval Europe. Ship_
“Suzanne Delage." In Qdggä- Ed- Ursula L- L9 GU10 and Vif* nwhen I Was Ming the Merciless." In Ides of Tomorrow. Ed.
9l“}a Kloo _No"' York: Pookotv 1980'_PP· 93"98· Ari Terry Carr. Boston: Little Bro 7-136.
_ lso-atoo ‘“a“_S Soaroh for the o’“·raoVomarY _ Confused identities in a student exercise/rebellion.
'Sweet ·Forest Maid." The Magazine of Fantasy and Science The Wolfe Archipelago. Willimantic, Conn: Ziesing
Qgggg. J¤lV 1971, pp- 60-64- An 1S¤1a¤@d w¤¤}a¤ Bmchers, 1983. coiiects the ··1S1a¤a ot nr. Death"
searches for the Abominable Snowwoman and the question trilccy with, in its Forawordl a Companion, „Daath Of
of the natnr 1 of humanity is raised. the Island Doctor."
The Sword of the Lictor. New York: Simon and Schuster, wma woman the Unicorn Loved} Isaac Asimovls Science FiC_
i l98l The Qhlfd Volomo ef · tion Magazine, June 1980, pp. 70-87. Mythology and
'The Tale of the Student and His Son." The Magazine of Fan- genetic engineering: a sequel to "The Woman Who Loved
tasy and Science Fiction, Oct. 1981, pp. 117-128. An the Centaur Pholus" (see below).
omoooooo StorY from · l "The Woman Who Loved the Centaur Pholus." Isaac Asimov's
"Tarzan of the Grapes," The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Science Fiction Magazine, DaC_ ig-,9
J¤¤€‘ 1972, DD- 123*129- NQWSWGV1 1“V@m? 8 Mythology and genetic engineering (see also "The Woman
hloolo mYt-h that Como two- the Unicorn Loved," above).
"'Ihag." In Continuum 4. Ed. Roger Elwood. New York: Put-
nam, 1975. Fourth in the Continuum series and the
most fantastic (see also "The Dark of the June," "The
Death of Hyle," and "From the Notebook of Dr. Stein").
"Thou Spark of Blood." IE, April 1970, pp. 105-109, and
157. A spaceship murder with allusions to Macbeth.
"’1‘hree Fingers." In New Constellations. Ed. Thomas Disch
and Charles Naylor. New York: Harper and Row, 1976,
pp. 5-12. A sinister view of Walt Disney's creatures.
"Three Million Square Mi1es." In Ruins of Earth. Ed.
Thomas Disch. New York: Putnam, 1971, pp. 39-44. An
ecological story: looking for America's wilderness.
"To the Dark Tower Came." In Orbit 19. Ed. Damon Knight.
New York: Harper and Row, 1977, pp. 120-125. An am-
biguous story packed with allusions to everyone from
Kigg Lear to "Jack and the Beanstalk."
"The Toy Theater." In Orbit 9. Ed. Damon Knight. New
York: Putnam, 1971, pp. 43-50. Examines the nature
of humanity and the value of reality, with puppets.
"Tracking Song.“ In In the Wake of Man. Ed. Roger Elwood·
New York: Bobbs Merrill, 1975, pp. 87-176. Examines
the nature of humanity.
"Trip Trap." In Orbit 2. Ed. Damon Knight. New York=
Berkley, 1967, pp. 110-144. Early exploration of 116*
ture of humanity using myths and a human ar-
chaeologist.
"Volksweapon." Mike Shane's Mysteg Magazine, Sept. 1967:
pp. 53-59. A straight mystery story.
"'Ihe War Beneath the Tree." Omi, Dec. 1979, pp. 822-284,
106 107
_l __ ______ ____ __t
n Knight, mw Yok Putnam, l97, p. 86-9l. A
light tceatnent oE the natue nf h3wnanity.
''Staw.'' Gala , an. l975, pp ll7-l28. A yOung cenay
in an altenate rredieval Euro.
''Suzame Delage.'' Tn Ed es. Ed. Usula L. Le Guin and Vi-
ginia Kidd. Mew Yo; ket, l98, pp. 93-98. m
isojated nan's search fo the extraOcdina.
''Sweet Foest maid.'' m_e ma0azine of 'antas and Science
Fiction, July l97l, pp, 60-64. An isolated w Oman
seaches f the inable Snn and the 0estiOn
of the natL > of hwnanity is aised
The Sword of the Lictor. ew York: SinDn and Schuste,
l98l. me thid l o Te k of the Yew un.
''me Tale of the tudent and His Son.'' me maaaine Of Fan-
tas and Science Fiction, t. 98l, pp ll7-l28. An
eded sto r me Citadel ot the Autach.
''Ta2an of the Grapes,'' me Maaazine oE Fantas and cience
Fiction, June l972, pp, l23-l29. MewsTren invent a
hippie th that cs te.
"mag.'' In Continuwn 4. Ed. Roge E w or t-
n, lo h in the Continuum seies and the
t fantastic (s also ''me Dak o the June,'' ''me
ath of Hyle,'' and ''F the Yotebook of D. Stein'').
''Th Spark of Bl'' IF, Apil l970, pp, l05-lO, aryd
l57. A spaceship yrde with allusions to cth,
mr Fingers'' In w Constellations. Ed, ms Disch
and Charles aylo. w Yok: Haqer and R, l76,
pp. 5-l2, A siniste view of Walt Disney's ceatures
''Three illion Square Miles.'' In Ruins Of Earth. Ed
ms isch. Mew Yok; tn, l97, pp. 39-44.
elica sto; lki fo rica's wildeness,
"To the rk Ta3er C,'' In bit l9. . n Miaht.
ew Yo: Harpe and Rm_, l977, pp. l20-l25. An -
bis sto ck with allusioM tO everyO fr
Ki ar to ''Jack and the anstalk, '
'The T Theate'' In Orbit 9. Ed, n might. W
ok: t, l97l, 93-50. Exis the natue
of hnit and the value of reality, with puts.
''ackirq Song,'' In In the Make of Man , R El,
York: merill, l975, pp. 87-l76 ExanneS
the natu of hnity
''Trip Trap" Tn Orbit 2. Ed. Damon Kni3ht. w YOrki
rkley, l967, . llO-l44, Ealy eloati Of '
ture of humanity using myths and a human ar'
chaeologist.
''Volksweapon." _ike shane's ste Ma0azi, pt, l961I
pp. 53-59. A straight yste stO.
"me Mar ath the .'' i, c, l979, . 822284,
l06

t_t _
13D. A Onely bOy and his ejected toys at Chis s.
estwind'' IF July/Augt l973, pp. 3lOll7. The b e s t
leader Or l Oney Op1e ma kes it a rsonal relation
ship
en I Mas ming the merciless." 3n Ide5 of T r r ow. Ed.
Tr Carr. ston: Little & _, l976, p p, 27-l36.
COnfus identities in a student exercise /e be llion.
The MOlfe Archi DelaaO MiJlimantic, Conn: ziesin
BOthes, l983 Collects the "I5land of Dr. ath"
til O9Y with, in its Foreword, a c nion, "aeath ot-
the Island to.''
"me n the UnicOrn ved.'' Isaac ivts science Eic
ti On a2ine, June 1980, pp, 70-87. mytholo gy and
ge m tc e 1neei rq; a se el to "The W n o Lo v e d
the Centaur Ph o1us'' (see l )
''The WOman WhO LOved the Centa4r Pholu5." Isaac iv's
Science Fiction maaazine, De c. 1979, p p , l O g- l l g.
thOly and genetic eineeing (see al5o "The n
the Unicorn ved,'' a ve)
l07

X g XI
A SELECTED AND ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY „
OF NON_E.ICTION WRITING A SLLEICTED AND ANNGTATED SECONDARY BIBLIOCRAPHY
"The Be1lman‘s Wonder Ring." In Clarion SF. Ed. Kate Wil- Bishopigbéähaig JBGQEQ w%llt§i;iSn;(¥Ol'éI ———ThmS;’rN'wä§
, _ 1  '  O G GS B G O
;ä;2érSNi:eY?iä‘;%i l§g ’t€laiZllf1gpggofiisgggaliviälää "never publish a bad book," Bishop lauds The Shadow of
writing · the Torturer, discusses Wolfe's characteristic style,
Castle of the Otter: A Book About the Book of the New Sun. S23 giäs Wolfe Some questlons about
Willimantic, Conn: Ziesing Brothers 1982. Eleven —-—-—+°
chapters on the making of Wo1fe‘s trilogy, ranging in BUÖIIYSML Of iäxéagf T;eSShadow Fof tthe Tglrtuäegéb The
subjects from Vocabulary through symbols to reviews; Sees Th Booin tcésncä lg mm t ay ' PP
includes a "bio—bib1iography" by Gordon Benson, Jr. Of boéks but noctgi a Senes
"More Translations from the Editorial." The Alien Critic, Rev Of The Claw Of the Conäliétor The
N . 9 M 1974 . — . A . Ä ‘ --1*: . - ·—*—‘
6; an édääor Ofnßlgät ääeerälälfe Speaks ln ms hole Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, June 1981,
"Ofga_niZj_l']g a to writ€II Eknpire SF! 4l NO' 2 (Feb' pp-
1979 25-26- t. ' N . 9 1977 . Th -———-—° ' .—--9-————
and sacrificesrcä? tuääibusomitér ) E 44444 April 198% pp- 2+29-
"”4*“4 Tgjkgjg ggjjjfr?4 fljiyjs fgjgav w 4;<3g<}¤r agj Pogiti EäE°¥äE€EuÄ‘”T——S §¥°‘€uS E?E€E€I;§aEl€S.SE§€é?.§‘f‘°uÄiE.Eé?“
prätation Ofyéhe ’ the Rin ip' ° ln er . Rev. of The Citadel of the Autarch. The Magazine
··uuuu uu uu., Mean, SFT The Wauu., August 1980, uu. n- .....z——---g;l4;4¤4ajh 4444 Sg4jr··=4 Fgggoné QP4;4 44%%% PP 43 46
13, and 45. Wolfe defines science fiction, specula- in fiiläOI2pB‘i1dl;;SOSpeCil§t;; iäijnawääääijvägä
tive fiction, and science fantasy. . „ ' .-—
"Writers' Conferences" (with George R.R. Martin). _ElrQire Egäilsreasäme ?aä;‘?rwOrk’ O; ä work that glves
Q, No. 14 (July 1978), pp. ll-14. A conversation re- Cl t J Isp S Ron O flägha ed ir 'f h
corded at 13'Hamacon in Birmingham, Alabama, in August, U eéqashännéon PC;\;'BO%k
1977, discussing the merits of wr1ters' conferences. This highly favorgblé review touéhää Upor; $:6
Book‘s religious themes.
Dirda, Michael. "Gene Wolfe Talks About ‘The Book of the
New Sun."‘ Washington Post Book World, 30 Jan. 1983,
p. 11. A general interview with some interesting dis-
_ cussion of influences.
Dozois, Gardner. "An Interview of Gene Wolfe." Xenolith
One, pp. 26-34. A discussion of Wo1fe's goals as a
writer.
Edwards, Malcolm. "Gene Wolfe: an Interview." Vector, No.
6, (May—June 1973), pp. 7-15. Some autobiographical
information, along with discussions of Mervyn Peake
and of Wo1fe's writing schedule.
_____. "Wolfe, Gene." The Science Fiction Encyclogia.
Ed. Peter Nicholls. Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1979, pp. 659-660. Good suzmwary of Wo1fe's career and
characteristics .
G0rdon, Joan. "An Interview with Gene Wolfe." Science Fic-
108 109
_ttt t __ _
X
A SE ED AY D ATED BIBLI 0 HY
OF -CTI OM TTI
''me l n's nder Ring,'' n Clarion SF. Ed Kate Wil
he, Yew YOrk; rkley, l977, pp. 43-47. Wulfe
po nders the dif{iculty of teaching proessionalism in
writi rq
Ca stle of the Ot ter; A k t th e k Of th e Me w Sun.
Mil1imantic, Conn Zie5ing Broers, 1982, Eleven
aptes on the ki ng of Wolfe's tril Og y, ranging in
subjects fr vabula through 1s to reviews;
includes ''bio-bibli Og raphy'' by rd0n nson, Jr.
moe Tanslations fr the itoial'' m e N ien Critic,
Mo 9 (may l974), pp, 32-33. WOlfe s pe aks in his 'oe
as an edit Or O Plant E ,aineerina
Organizing a ife to Write.'' ,0ie SF, 4, . 2 (Feb.
l979), 25-?6 mt, o0ire, Mo 9 (l977) The natue
and sacrifices o the 5eri s iter
''me TD1kien toll-fr Eities freeway to modOr and pOints
be yond huray.!'' Vector, 67/8. pp. 7-ll, An inte
pretation of me Lo d o e Ri s,
Wh at m ey mean, SF?'' m e Ni iter, August l980, pp ll-
l3, and 45 Molfe defines science fiction, s pe cula-
tive ficti On, and science antasy.
Witers' Conferences'' (with rge RR. Ma in), ' e
SF, Mo , l4 (July 978), pp ll-l4 A conversation re-
corded at B'H ama con in Binniqh, a , in Au gust,
l977, dis ssi rq the rre rits of writers' conferences.
l08

__________ ___ __ _t ___ _4
XI
A SELECTED AMD ATED SECOYY BIBLI0 HY
Bi'shop, michael, ''Gene WOlte as Heo.'' Thrust, M l6 (Fall
980t, pp lO-l3, Claiming Wolfe as a hero who muld
''never plish a bad book, '' 6ishop lauds me Shadm Of
the Torturer, discusses Wolfe's charactecistic style,
and asks lfe s questions about T_he BoOk of the
Mew Sun.
Budr5, Algis Rev. of The Shad of the TOrturer, The
Ma_0azine of Fantas and Scien Fiction, May l980, .
26-27. Sees me k o the Mew Sun not as a series
of ks but as ''one k with fr aspects.'
. Rev. of The Claw o the ConciliatOr. The
Maaazine of Fantas and Science Fiction, June 198l,
pp. o- l. Discusses T e k s lne craftsnship,
. Rev. of me Smd of the ictor. The ma0a2ine of
Fantas and _Science Fiction, ril l982, pp, 25-29.
Discusses me k's categorization as science icti On
and The Sward of the Lictor as a transitimal vol.
. Rev. of me Citadel of the Awtarch. me Ya0azine
of Fantas and_Science Fiction, April l983, pp. 43-46.
Caling the cletion of the tetralO9y ''a major event
in this field,'' Budrys speculates upOn whether The
k is ''a true masteok, o.. . a wOrk that gives
the iqression of being a sterwOrk.'
Clute, ohn. Rev. of The Citadel Of the Autarch.
Mashinaton Post k M_orld, 0 Jan. 9^0, , -, and
ll. mis highly favoable review touches upon _The
k's religious thenes.
Dirda, Michael. ''Gene lfe Talks ut 'The k Of e
Yew Sun. ' '' WashinatOn Pt k ld, 30 Jan. l983,
p. ll. A general interview wi s interesting dis-
cussion of inluences.
zOis, Gardne. "An nteiew of ne WOlfe.'' nOlith
, pp. 26-34. A discus5ion Of Olfe's gls as a
wTite.
ards, alcol, ''ne wolfe: an Tnteiew.'' Vector .
6, (Mayune l973), pp. 7-l5, autObiOgraphical
iotion, al with discussions Of mervyn Peake
and of lfe's witi schedule.
. ''ole, Gene,'' _me Science Ficti On Enc cla0aia.
Ed, Peter Yicholls. Garden City, Yi ubleday,
l979, pp. 659-660. s Of lfe's reer and
chaacteristics.
n, Joan. '' nteie with Ge lfe.'' Scien Fic-
l09

tion Review, Summer 1981, pp. 18-22. Wolfe discusses
his life, his writing, writing in general, and life in INDEX
general.
Greenland, Colin. Rev. of The Shadow of the Torturer and
The Claw of the Conciliator. Foundation, Feb. 1982,
pp. 82-85. Intelligent discussion of Wo1fe's use of . ' _'
science fiction and fantasy, and of the layers of his "'A Story, by John V. Marsch : 19, 20, 23-25
pmS€_ ad0l€SC€Üt novel: 44-46, 101
Hull, Elizabeth. Rev. of The Book of the New Sun. Ex- "AdOPted Fathem The": 51* S5, Igor 102
tra latiom 23, NO. (1983), 2-,0_274_ Stresses Y1; ··p,g,?1n5t the Ijafayette Escadrille : 100, 102, 104, 105
importance of The Book of the New Sun in science fic- "A}len St°“‘5S : 51* 57-58* 100* 105
tion and discusses the functions of the four volumes. alle"? 7* 20* 24* 100* lol' 102
Jonas, Gerald. Rev. of The Citadel of the Autarch. New allE‘Sl5nS: 5* 6* 7* 52* 65* 106
York Times Book 1 S; ¤¤¤1¤¤l¥Y= 3· 6· 7· 8; l§· 2<>· 27, 3*% 56*5% 6l· *2· 106
nificant because the highly favorable review repre— “A“ Article About Huntmg ‘ 6* 55* 100* 102
sents the New York Times's prestigious acknowledgment androgenyz 83-84, 85
of Wo1fe's standing in science fiction. arCh‘5tYp‘5S: 54* 57* 81* 85* 85587* 98
Kaveney, Roz. Rev. of The Island of Doctor Death and Other arCÜlt}€‘?tUr‘5‘ 25* 59* 80* 105* 104
Storiesh FOunda artificial intelligence: 21, 22-23, 101, 103, 104
Kaveney offers interpretations of several short AS‘·mOV*_IS5‘5C: ,8* 16
stories and discusses several recurring patterns. Austgllan a}5O¤g¥“‘5S‘ 25
Sargent, Pamela. Afterword to The Fifth Head of Cerberus. autobmgraphlcal lnfluencm 4* 52-55* 58* 105
New York: Ace, 1976, pp. 271-277. Discussion of the gé 121 5% S?
novella cyc1e's unity. ' .' ’ _ ’
. "Wo1fe, Gene (Rodman)." Twentieth Century Eau-On' Nelff 19
Science Fiction Writers. Ed. Curtis C. Smith. NY: „„ä°;auäyä5r£C£,,: ?ä654’ l0O’ 102
St. Martins, 1981, pp. 595-596. Includes an interest- „B£i“a { . W d R. Th „_ 108
ing quote from Wolfe about his writing; Sargent sum- Benson nDän_ gg On er mg' 5 ‘
marizes his major work through The Fifth Head of Cer— Bible_’ 22 °92 94 102
' I I I
är-\§·° Bishop, Michael: 109
"B1ue Mouse, The": 100, 102
Boethius: 95
Book of the New Sun, The: 7, 9, 10, 20, 23, 30, 41, 49-50,
54, 59, 73-98, 100, 101, 102, 105, 106, 109, 110
ääges, Jorge Luis: 7, 37, 38, 79, 89, 105
FYS, Algis: 73, 109
Qääeaäcracyz 6, 16, 54-57, 100, 102, 104
r inister": 5, 100, 102
Eastle of the Otter, The: 73, 88, 108
Changéling, The": 29, 30, 51, 58, 59-60, 100, 102
Eharacterization: 11-12, 31-37, 46, 58, 72, 80, 81-87
Cähérry Jubilee": 72, 100
esterton, G.K.: 48-49, 97
°h%ldh0od= 4, 32, 40, 58, 105
. chlldren: 7, 37, 49, 58-64, 100, 103, 105, 107
Christ: 63-64, 70-71, 85, 86, 92-97, 101
Cétadel of the Autarch, The: 73-98, 100, 102, 106, 109, 110
1VlS Läputus Sum": 100
110 111
_____novel cyc_l_ee_un_y____
tion Review, S r l98l, pp. 8-22. Wole discusses
his life, his iti ng, writing in general, and life in
ge ral
Gr nla nd, Co lin Rev. Of m e Shad m of th e Torturer and
m e Claw of the Conciliator. Fou nd ation, Feb. l982,
_pp. 82-85. Intelllgent discuss _ion Of Wolfe's ue o
5cience ficti On and fantasy, and Of the layers of his
Pr e.
Hul, Elizabeth. Rev o The Boo k of the New Sun. Ex-
traalati On, 23, Mo. 3 {l983), 270-274. Stresses the
' rtance of m e k of th e w Sun in science fic-
tion and discusses the functions of the our vol unB s.
JOnas, Gerald Rev. of The Citade3 of the Autarch. Yew
York Times Bo ok Review, 22 may l983, . l5. Sig-
nificant because the highly avorable nview epre-
sents Ul e Me w YOrk Ti ne s's prestigious ackn m led nt
of lfe's sta nd i ng in science fiction
Ka veney, Roz. Rev. of me Island of tor ath and Other
Stories. FOundati On, 2l (Feb. l98l), pp. 79-83.
Kaveney offers interpretations of several shot
stories and discusses several e cu ri q patterns.
5argent, P la. Æte nxo d to me Fifth ad of Cerbe rus.
Yew YOrk e, 1976, pp. 27l-277. Discussion of the
la l '
. ''olfe, Gene (ROd ma n).'' TW entieth Centur
Scien ce Fiction Wr iters Ed. Cutis C. Smith. MY;
St. i ns, 08, . 95-596. Includes an interest-
i qu Ote r an lfe a bo ut his wT iting; Sagent s um -
ma izes his jor rk through _m e Fifth Head of Ce-
be rus '
1lO

__lt,
IMD EX
A Sto ,' by ohn V. ma sch'': l9, 20, 23-25
adolescent nOvel: 44-46, lOl
Adopted Fathe, me'': 5l, 58, lOO, l02
ainst the faette Escadrille'': lOO, lU2, l04, l05
Alien Stones'': 5l, 57-S8, 100, l03
aliens: 7, 20, 24, lOO, lOl, l02
allusi Ons: 5, 6, 7, 52, 63, l06
amb iguity: 3, 6, 7, 8, l3, 20, 27, 38, 56-57, 6l, 72, l06
'' icle AbO ut Hunting'': 6, 53, lOO, l02
andreny: 83-84, 85
afchet ype s: 54, 57, 8l, 83, 86-87, 98
achitecture: 23, 39, 80, l03, l04
artificial intelligence: 2l, 22-23, 10l, l03, l04
k ' v, Isaac: 8, l6
Australian a bo rigjnes: 25
autobi aphical influence: 4, 32-33, 58, l09
awad5: 9, l9, 5l, 62, 73
baroque: 8, 5l, 75-8l, 94
Barron, Yeil: l9
''autyland'': 53-54, lOO, l02
' ech Hill'': lOO
l lJna n's magic Monder Ring, me'': l08
nson, n: l7
Bible: 22, 92, 94, l02
BishOp, michael: l09
Blue mo use, m e'': lOO, l02
thius: 95
k Of the Yew Sun, Te: 7, 9, lO, 20, 23, 30, 4l, 49-SO,
5Q, 5g, 73-gg, lOOp 01, l02, lOS, l06, l09, llO
es, oge uis: 7, 37, 38, 79, 89, 105
dS, Algis-. 73, l09
reaucra; 6, 16, 54-57, lOO, l02, l04
Siniser.. 5, lOO, l02
stle of the Otter, me; 73, gg, l08
Changeling, m ei.. 2g, 30, 5l, 5, 59-60, l00, l02
?,, aracteri'aton; ll-l, 3l-37, 46, 5g, 7, gO, g3-87
Che Jubilee".. 7, lOOch
esteton, G.K... 4g-4g, g7
?il ; g, 32, 4o, 5g, lo5
?ildren; 7, 37, 4g, 5g_64, oo, l03, l05, l07?
rist: 6364, jo_ji, g5, g6, g2_gj, 10i i
tadel of the tar m e.. 73_gg, loo, lo, lo6, og, llo
Clvls putus s,.. '00
lll

Clarke, Arthur C.: 8 eenel Graham; 19
Claw of the Conciliator, The: 9, 73-98, 101, 109, 110 4 Gr nland, Colin: 73, 110
0100%* 20 ?ä;ilVard‘s Story--The Two Sealers": 80
Clute, John: 73, 109 uaeadless Man, The,,, 103
coming of age: 19, 74, 82, 102 Heinlajn, Robert: 8, ll
"C<>¤ti¤¤i¤0 W@s¤ward"= 101 ..,,6,0 ag, Werwolf, The": 51, 67, 58, 103
conventions, inverted: 57-58, 71, 100, 103 historical noVo1; 46-48, 101
"Criminal Proceeding, A": 101 „HORARS Of war, The"; 54, 103
"Cues": 5, 101, 103 ,,,,10,,,; of Trust": 103
"Dark of the June": 51, 58, 101, 102, 106 ngqonge of Ancestors": 29, 54, 103
"Dead Man, The": 9, 101 ,,,.10,,, 1 Lost the Second World War and Turned Back the German
"Death of Doctor Island, The": 8, 51, 58, 59, 60, 62, 101, Im,a51on": 5, 52-53, 102, 103
IO3 "How the Whip Came Back": 102, 103
"Death of Hyle, Tha"; 51, 72, 101, 102, 106 Hugo Award: 9, 51, 73
"Death of the Island Doctor": 108 Hull, Elizabeth; 73, 110
"Detective of Dreams, The": 51, 101 humanity, nature of: 19, 20, 22-23, 24, 29, 64-67, 101,
Devil in a Forest, The: 9, 43-50, 58, 101 102, 103, 105, 106
Dickens, Charles: 7, 37, 63, 101, 104 identity; 7, 19, 20, 24, 27, 29, 107
Dickinson, Emily: 23 ··1¤ r„ook1ng—c;1asa caSt1a··: 103
Dirdar M1Cha€l* 73: 109 "Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories, The": 7, 29, 30,
"Doctor of Death Island, The": 60, 62-63, 101, 103 51, 58, 59, 60-62, 101, 103 I
"Dr. Ta1os's Play: Eschatology and Genesis": 79 Island of Doctor Death and Other Stories and Other Stories,
Dozois, Gardner: 4, 109
dreams: 7, 24, 43 ··1a1an§r Doctor Death, The" triiogyz 20, 51, 54, 59, 60-
ecologyz 6, 15-16, 53-54, 100, 106 53, 101, 103
Edwards, Malcolm: 8, 109 isolatiom 7, 29, 32, 35-36, 39, 44, 49, 58-64, 100, 101,
embedded stories: 7, 8, 35-36, 37, 38-39, 79-80, 102, 105, 102, 103, 105, 106, 107
106 ··1t·a Very c1aa¤··; 103
entertainments: 5, 52-53, 100, 101, 103 Jonas, Gerald: 74, 110
"EY€b@m°°¢ 29: 64: 101 Kafka, Franz: 6, 102
"Eyeflash Miracles, The": 51, 58, 63-64, 71, 101, 103 Kaveney, Roz: 110
famläsl/¢ 43: 73, 97-98, 110 "Kevin Malone": 103
"Feather Tigers": 51, 102, 103 "King Under the Mountain": 103
"Fifth Head of Cerberus, 'Ihe": 19, 20-23, 51, 64, 102 Knight, Damon: 6, 9, 17, 19
Fifth Head of Cerberus, The: 6, 7, 8, 9, 19-29, 58, 59, 80, Korean War: 4, 59-60
90, 102, 110 1 "La Befana": 6, 102, 103, 104
"Foi1a's Story--The Armiger's Daughter": 80, 102 "Last Day"; 104
"Forlesen": 6, 20, 23, 51, 54-57, 102 "1·&St Thrilling Wonder Story, The": 51, 72, 104
"Four Wolves": 102 Lewis, C. S.: 61, 97
"Frcu the Notebook of Gilmer C. Merton": 102 "1-oco Parentis": 100, 104, 105
"Frcn the Notebook of Dr. Stein": 51, 101, 102, 106 locus: 9, 73
Gene Wo1fe's Book of Days: 6, 9, 51, 102 "1-Oyal to the Group of Seventeen's Story——the Just Man":
genetic engineering: 88, 107 80, 81, 87
giantism: 77-78 McDonald, George: 97
"God and his Man, The": 102 mainstream fiction: 30-31
"Going to the Beach": 102 "Ma¤Y Mansions": 23, 51, 53, 102, 104
Gordon, Joan: 109 “Th@ Marveloug Brass Chesgplaying Automaton": 104
"Green Wall Said, The": 103 "Ma1?h¤mS from the Time Closet": 100, 104, 105
112 113
__ _
ake, ACthUf Ci
Claw oE the Conciliator, m e: 9, 73-98, lOl, l09, llO
clones: 20
Clute, J oh n: 73, l09
c ing of age; l9, 74, 82, l02
''Continuing We5tward''= lOl
co nventions, invert ed: 57-58, 7l, lOO, l03
''Cciminal P oc di rq, A'': lOl
''Cues'': 5, lOl, l03
''Dark oE the June'': 5l, 5&, lOl, l02, lD6
'' ad Man, m e'': 9, lOl
''ath of tor Tsland, me'': 8, 5l, 58, 59, 60, 62, lOl,
lD3
''ath o Hyle, me'': 5l, 72, lOl, l02, l06
''ath of the Island to''; l08
''tective of e , me'': 5l, lOl
vil in a Forest, m e: 9, 43-50, 58, l01
Dicke ns, Charles: 7, 37, 63, lOl, l04
Dickinson, ily: 23
Dida, michael: 73, l09
n tor of ae a Island, m e'': 60, 62-63, lOl, l03
''. Tal's Play: Eschatol and nesis'': 79
zois, Gadne: 4, l09
de m: 7, 24, 43
e co l : 6, l5-l6, 53-54, lOO, l06
Edwad5, malcolm: 8, l09
dded stories: 7, 8, 35-36, 37, 38-39, 79-80, l, 105,
l06
entertai nts: 5, 52-53, lOO, l0l, l03
''e '': 29, 64, lOl
''eflash iracles, me'': 5l, 58 63-64, 7l, ll, l3
antasy: 43, 13, 97-98, llO
''Feater Tiger5''; 5l, l02, l03
''FiEth Head oE Ce ru s, m e'': l9, 20-23, 5l, 64, l02
Fifth Head of Cerbe n3s, me: 6, 7, 8, 9, l9-29, 58, 59, 80,
00, 02, ll
''Foila's Story--me Anni'ger's ughter''; 80, l02
''Forlesen'': 6, 20, 23, 5l, 54-57, l02
''F ou r lve5'': l02
''Fr the Mote k of Gi r C. e Ft on''; l02
''Fr the Mote k of , Stein'': 5l, lOl, l02, l06
ne lfe's k o s; 6, 9, 5l, l2
ge netic e i nee i ng 88, l07
gianti 77-78
'' God a his n, m e'': l02 .
''Goiq to the a'': l02
GO rdon, n; l09
"G re en Mall Said, m e'': l03

__lt t ,,
eene, Gah i l9
nland, lini 73 llO
lvard's StO--The Sealers'' 80
Headless nr m e''i l03
yeinlein, RO rti 8, ll
yeo as We OlI m e'': 5lI 57, 58, l03
histoical nOveli 46-48I l0
t S o War, m e'' 54, l03
your Of T nl st''= l03
Hou5e of An Ce5tOrS''i 29, 54 l03
I IDst the SecOnd MOrld Mar and Turned Back the rrna n
Invasion'' 5, 52-53, l02, l03
H the M ip Ba ck'' l02, l03
Hugo Award: 9, 5l, 73
Mull, Elizath: 73, llO
h nity, natue Ofi lY, 2, 22-23, 24, 29, 64-67, lol
l02, l03, l05, l06
identity: 7, l9 20, 24, 27, 29, l07
"n Loo king lass Castle'': l03
''sland Of tOr ath and Other Stories, The'': 7, 29, 3,
5l, 58, 59, 60-62, lOl, 103
Island Of tO ath and Ot her Stories a nd Ot her Stories
The: 6, 5l, l03, l3
sland Of Doc tOr ath, m e'' tril : 20, 5l, 54, S9, 60-
63, lOl, l03
ilation: 7, 29, 32, 35-36, 39, 44, 49, 58-64, lOO, lOl,
l02, l03, l05, l06, lo7
It's Ve ry Clean'': l03
JOnas, Ge cald.. 74, llO
fka, Franz: 6, l02
veney, Roz: llO
vin Ma lone". l03
King Unde the m ntain'': l03
might, Dana n; 6, g, l7, lg
KOrean ar.. 4, 5g-60
fana": 6, 102, l03, l04
st y": l04
St mrilli onde sto, me": 5l, 72, lOQ
is, c. s.; 6, g7
Parenti5": lOO, l04, l05
s: g, 73
4l tO the G p of seventeen'5 Stoy--the Ju5t man":
80, 8l, g7
nald, Geo rge.. g7
,, n5te fiction. 3D_3lya
ny nsions". 23, 5, 53, l02, l04
me els Bass chessplayiq Aut ton". l04
th % f the Time c0set".. loo, o4, lo5
ll3

mazes: 77, 78-80, 94 „RubbeL· Bend, The": 105
"Melito's story——The Cock, the Angel, and the Eag1e"= 80 ,,5,;, Brandon"= 102, 105
"Melting": 102, 104 Sargent, Pamela: 19, 110
memoir: 23, 27, 31, 33-35, 40, 59, 79, 91-92, 105 1 Science fantasy: 97-98, 108
memory: 7, 19, 23, 29, 33-35, 37, 38, 40, 41-42, 59-60, 61- Science fiction: 3, 8, 13, 20, 30-31, 41, 46-47, 68, 69-70,
62, 77, 79, 83, 90-91 75, 87, 88-90, 98, 108, 109, 110
metafiction: 36-37, 104 nscreen Test": 105
metaphors: 7-8, 23, 28, 54, 57, 92 Searles, Baird: 74
"Method Bit in 'B', A": 104 Sentence structure: 7, 45-46, 76-77
"More Translations from the Editorial": 108 Setting: 19, 23, 44, 80-81
"Morning Glory": 104 “Seven American Nights": 7, 8, 20, 41, 51, 67-72, 89, 98,
"Mountains like Mice": 58, 104 103, 105
mystery: 41, 48-49, 100, 105, 106 Severian: 8, 49-50, 82-86, 90-92
myth= 7, 24, 28, 104, 106, 107 Shadow or the rorturar, The: 8, 9, 58, 73-98, 105, 109, 110
narration: 26, 31, 35, 54, 61, 82-83, 90-92, 94 ··5i1houette": 105
narrative frames: 35-36, 67-68 "Slaves of Silver": 105
Nebula Award: 9, 51, 62, 73, 101 Slepyan, Norbert: 19
novel of ideas: 13 sociological stories: 6, 15, 53-54
"Of Relays and Roses": 102, 104 "A Solar Labyrinth": 105
gration ARES: 6, 9, 11-18, 27, 28, 104, "Sonya, Crane Wessleman, and Kittee": 106 ‘
John Castle: ll, 12 speculative fiction: 3, 8, 31, 59, 108
Orbit: 6, 9, 19 story cycle: 20, 28, 60
"Organizing a Life to Write": 108 storytellingz 27-28, 38-39, 80
"Our Neighbor, By David Copperfield": 104 "Straw": 58, 106
"The Packerhaus Method": 104-105 St}/l@= 6, 7, 12, 13, 28, 37, 44-46, 75-81, 109
"Paul's Treehouse": 58, 102, 105 S¤¤= 93
Peace: 7, 9, 23, 30-42, 58, 59, 80, 90, 100, 105 "ßuzanne Delage": 106
Alden Dennis Weer: 31-37 "Sweet Forest Maid": 106
Peake, Mervyn: 19, 109 SWOrd of the Lictor, The: 73-98, 106, 109
perception: 7, 8, 40-41, 66, 62, 67-70, 90-92, 102 , 1·ne··: 79
, „ II w
·pe¤tGnit1S·; 105 uäale of the Student and His Son, The": 79, 106
Plant E ineeri : 4, 32-33, 108 __ 95290 Of the GfäD@S"= 106
Plato: 94 Th99'= 51, 101, 102, 106
pglitiggg 3, 11, 12, 14-15, 17, 87, 104 "ThaQ" Series: 20, 51, 72, 101, 102, 106
popularity: 3, 9, 30, 73 „ä°“ Säéfk 0f Blood": 106
Proust, Mamei: 7, 37, 38, 105 „ *99 }¤96rS"= 57, 58, 103, 106
psychological stories: 3, 7-8, 53, 54-57 trmree M1l11O¤ Square Miles": 30, 53, 102, 106
puns: 3, 5, 7, 15, 52, 100 ,,,1%:9éh 4I;4}2, 69-70, 76, 89-90, 93-95, 100, 101, 104, 105
realism; 36 _ e F TONQI CGRQ": 72, 106
reality, nature of: 7, 8, 24, 36-37, 69-70, 103, 104, 105' '£ä’_äkl9¤, ~1,RR.: 97, 103
wö 9 Tgelkien toll-free fifties freeway to Mordor and points
reason: 48-50 1/909 h¤rray1"= 108
rebirth: 70-71, 78, 86, 92-97 J $$9*9* 64-65
··Re¤6¤11ng, 11¤e··: 105 1 ,-1;*; T99t9”"= 29, 51, 64, 193, 106
reiigian; 3, 47-50, 63-64, 65, 70-71, 92-97, 101, 109 „Tri° "'9 §O0Q"¤ 7, 20, 51, 64-66, 103, 106
"Remembrance to Cana": 29, 51, 105 L Urthpograp ‘ 64, 106
revision: 5 ’ , 73
··Ro¤¤;·s s;6,5y··: 104, 105 _ g "'99P<>¤ = 106
‘ ä
114 _^ 1 é 115
__ __
zes; 77, 78-&O, 94
''melito's Story--me Ck, the mgel, and the Eagle'': 80
''Melti'': l02, l04
ir: 23, 27, 3l, 33-35, 40, 59, 79, 9l-92, l05
ra: 7, l9, 23, 29, 33-35, 37, 38, 40, 4i-42, 59-60, 6l
62, 77, 79, 83, 90-9l
netafiction: 36-37, l04
taphors: 7-8, 23, 28, 54, 57, 32
''meth Bit in ' B', A'': lOQ
''more Tranlatiors f the Editorial'' l08
''Moning Glory''; l04
''FtountaiM like mi'': 5, 04
nvste; 4l, 48-49, lOO, l05, l06
th: 7, 24, 28, l04, l06, l07
naration: 26, 3l, 35, 54, 6l, 82-83, 9D-92, 9
narrative ranes: 35-36, 67-68
Mebula Award: 9, 5l, 62, 73, lOl
novel o ideas: l3
''Of Relays and Res'': l02, l04
a00ration AR 6, , ll-l8, 21, 28, l04,
John Ustle: ll, l2
bit: 6, 9, l9
''Organizing a i{e to rite'': l08
''Ou Meighbor, D3vid pefield'' l04
''me Pacehau3 meth''; l4ml05
"Paul's Trhse'': 58, l02, l05
a: 7, 9, 23, 30-42, 58, 59, 80, 90, lOO, l05
en Mis r: 3l-37
ake, nyn: 19, 109
peroeptim: 7, 8, 40-4l, 56, 62, 67-70, 90-92, l02
''Peritonitis'': l05
Plant E 0ieri 0: 4, 32-33, l08
Plato 94
politics; 3, ll, l2, l4-l5, l7, 87, l04
laity: 3, 9, 30, 73
st, marnl; 7, 37, 38, l05
psycholOgical stoies: 3, 7-8, 53, 5-57
pune 3, 5 7, l5, 52, lOO
nali; 36
ty, ture of; 7, g, 4, 36-37, 6g-70, l03, l04, l05,
l06
re: 48-50
rebih 77l, 78, 86, 92-97
''Reiq, me''; l05
religt0n.. 3, 4750, 63-64, 65, 70-7l, 92m97, lOl l09 ,
'rance tO " 29, Sl, l05 ,
revision 5 .
Rt's So^; l04 l05 !i
ll4 n ,?

_,,tt, , lo4l lo5
,, nd, m e''; l05
st. Ba nd On'': l02 l05
,gent, P la: l9, llO
ence fantaSY: 97-98 l08
ence fiCtion 3, 8, l3, 20t 30-3l, 4l, 46-47, 5Y, 69-70,
75, 87, 88-90, 98, l08, l09, llO
x r n Test''i l05
ale5, ird: 74
ntence StruCtufe: 7, 45-46, 76"77
setting: l9, 23, 44, 80-8l
nven Ane ican Yights'': 7, 8, 20, 4l, 5l, 67-7, 89, 98,
3o3, l05
verian: 8, 49-50, 82-86, 90-92
sad m of the TOturer, The: 8, 9, 58, 73-98t l05, l09, llO
n'iouette'': l05
slaves of Silve''; l05
slepyan, MOr rt: l9
siolical stOries 6, l5, 53-54
"A 5ola La byinth'': l05
hnya, Cane Wessleman, and Kittee'': l06
s cuative ficti On: 3, 8, 3l, 59, l08
story cycle: 20, 28, 60
stOtelling: 27-28, 38-39, 80
"5taw'': 58, l06
style 6, 7, l2, 13, 28, 37, 44-46, 75-8l, 109
8un: 93
Su2an lage'': l06
Swet Foest Ma id". l06
Of the icto, m e: 73-98, l06, l09
Tale of the y clled F , m e; 7g
Tale O the Student and His son, m e"; 79, l06
Tar2an of the Ga s',.. l06
m '': Sl, lOl, o2, o6
mag''series: 20, , 72, o3, l02, l06
m Ou S rk of B ; o6
m Fiers,; 57, 5g, 3o3, 3o6
ee Million s 0 ae mles-. 30, 53, l02, l06
t, ' : 4l-42, 6g_7o, 76, gg_go g3_g5, oo, io3
TO the r T er c ,.. 7,'3
lkien, .R.R...
me Tolkie to3_fí tes eeway to modo, and
yOnd huray.. lOg
t : 6_65
T q m eater.
acing so ng.
ip Trap'. 64 ió6 ' ' - ' '
? oE th ' ,
voi e eW Sun, m e: 73
a n" i6
ll5

"V.R.T.": 19, 20, 25-27
Vinge, Vernor: 28
vocabulary: 7, 44-45, 75-76, 108
Vonnegut, Kurt: 33
"War Beneath the Tree, The": 58, 59, 102, 107
Wells, H.G.: 60
"Westwind": 5l, 107
"What Do They Mean, SE‘?": 108
"When I Was Ming the Merci1ess": 107
"Woman the Unicorn Loved, The": 107
"Woman Who Loved the Centaur Pholus, The": 53, 107
women: 82-87, 103
"Writers' Conferences": 108
Wolfe Archiglago, The: 108
116
"v.R.T."; l9, 20, 25-27
Vinge, Vernor: 28
vocabula : 7, 44-45, 75-76, l08
Vonne gu t, Kut: 33
"War neath the Tree, The'': 58, 59, lD2, l07
Wells, H.G.: 60
'estwind'': 5l, l07
''Mat mey mean, 5F?'': l08
''When T Was ming the meciless'': l07
''W n the Unicorn Lo ved, m e''; l07
"W n Who ved the Centaur Pholus, me'': 53, l07
w n: 82-87, l03
''Mriters' Conferences''; l08
W olfe chi0laao, m e; l08
