  
  
  
 

  
ELFLAND 
a man’s mouth water. 
Incredible? Aye, for it bears the stamp of the place that bore it. Think it could be otherwise? Why some say Gilgamesh himself’s come back, in Stories by Robert of the Silver Moun- 
tain, Bob Silverberg hed be in your 
speech. Gilgamesh, think on it! Not that I credit it, not I! Credulity can stretch but so far, eh? Yet that such a tale can be told proves something. 
Facts? Indeed“you must have ‘em if you're to make your mark there. Geography first. I said Fantasy borders Horror: better I'd said it laps it, for there's much in King Stephen's realm Fantasy claims as its own, and con- trariwise. Beg pardon for that last, a silly word I picked up from the Twee- dle boys; it clings like a tick. But I 
was brought up in Fantasy, and I fear 
it shows. 
Their laws differ, you understand. 
Fantasy’s subjects are subjects — what- ever's disbelieved: dragons and ghosts, unicorns, barbarian swordsmen, Pro- 
teus and all the other shape-shifters, 
giants and dwarves, princesses, fauns, ogres, trolls, and the lost lands. Old Chesterton! calls the whole Elfland, after the part he likes best. Some say Faerie. Most readers don't care, long as there's wonder and wisdom. 
Judy-Lynn?? Did you know her? Odin, how we miss her! Yes, she was a dwarf, the greatest of all, an editor at Del Rey and a citizen of Fantasy by birth. She reclaimed the Land of Oz, not just the Baum stories but the Thompson stories too. You thought 
there was but one? How quaint. You've 
much to learn. 
Horror lacks all native subjects, as 
I was telling you—citizenship’s confer- 
red by spirit. What inspires horror is 
Horror's, just as one who truly loves 
Big Brother's of Oceania. Orwell's 
book? lies in Horror—some aall it 
Dark Fantasy—and Science Fiction, 
and many a current one has a foot in 
Fantasy and a hand out to Horror; 
Down Town's‘ a fine example. 
Here's what Tom o Tor—Tom 
Broken Collar°—told me: Fantasy is a 
Pagan empire; Horror's a Christinan 
gdom, embracing Hell. There's 
sdom in that, but exceptions by the 
re. What of the host bearing the 
of Narnia,® I ask you? Chris- 
the core, with the lion-likeness 
‘Mailed to its cross. What of 
iver? Fantasy languished 
it The Hobbit, dwarves 
      
      
   
  
   
  
peaking Peoples and elves, all three S oh 
linked with humans in The Fello 
a, ee Fantasy $ got ae 
still, though not the tall me 
Porer. Shrink an inch a year, ae c 
and sillier all the time —blea 
_ 1 eall ‘em. Think they'd slap 
See Manner of J.R.R. Tolkien ve 
those books? Well, friend, they . 
He's spinning like a windmill in the 
grave because of it, you may nung 
One day hell blow em a = 
Horror—beg pardon, Hell. Weir 
Tales? is coming back. That's a sign, 
mark my words. Yes, the old pulp. 
But as I was saying, the faiths are 
ere a eS SR SO aaa 
“Fantasy s 
whatever's 
disbelieved: 
dragons, ghosts, 
unicorns, shape- 
shifters, giants 
and dwarves, 
princesses, fauns, 
ogres and trolls.” 
overmixed for me. I'd say rather that Fantasy's the country of the gods — with God over them all—where the cherubim shoot arrows with Eros. In Horror, Great Cthulhu slays Satan, and is slain. How's that? 
Good Queen Beth’ divides Fan- tasy in three. It’s worth your listening, for no one knows the place better: 
“The first is Horror. It has become a ma- jor sector of the market (labels, all is labels) differentiated from other sorts of fantasy even though literary overlap. When Stephen 
read sf. 
“Second ‘genre fantasy’, epitom; , » Spitomiz by good old Del Rey and Ace high = tasy and Sword-and-scorcery, | think of 
of these books is about abandoning One’ Own desires in Service to anothe ; gaining virtue. 
Rees Last, a small Qroup of highly literate   
    
and (usually) very iny 
books having in c 
elements of the fantasi; 
being pigeonhole. 
Crowley’s Little, Big: any, .. 
Thorne Smith noveis. = 
Falling Woman, Tom Digg..." 
Borges, Fuentes ... yo, .. ~* : 
own list. TE in, 
“Now, the problem 
distinction has been draw, . 2 
ror and everything else. by; "As 
distinction is being made Deh a 
fantasy and what | continue ., Ss 
temporary fantasy (even though ._@ 
bad label, misleading in —.. = 
There really isn’t any Way the rea... 
tell what's going to happen \aal, 
covers. ...” 
om nt 
Oo 4 3 
m1 oO 
BY p 
7 io) 
} 
> 
reat ha 
py 
That last’s pretty mug . _ 
bag, isnt it? Trouble is, ever, * 
lord of his own lands, ang a. two or three. Or lady of her 9... 
there's many a lass: Judith Tarr 
Tepper, Barbara Hambly, ang . Friesner, to name a few. Rea] maens 
every one, divinely mad on an, -. evening. Marion Zimme; Bradley: 
their queen, and Andre Norton's ths 
queen mother. Yes, a lady, Alice No. 
ton to you. 
Jane Yolen‘s everybody's warcis 
and Td say shes Hans Chnsizx Andersen, too, back from Death 
save his people.® 
Over on Merlin’s Isle 
Tanith Lee and Diana Wynne Jones 
the Arrow-Maker"® says Fantasy’s bes 
looking up there since Corgi publish 
David Eddings'’s The Belgariad \ 
smashing covers, though three-quares 
of what they read still comes from ow 
Western Land. Century 
committed to hardcovers, wi! 
Campbell, John Maxim, 2: Cus 
Rowley. Macdonald/Futura 
ing a hardcover fleet thi 
W.H. Allen/Star seems to b: 
trating on splatter —terrib)\ 
horror, don't you know Co 
Clive Barker half a million pours © 
an unwritten book. Gollanc: 
has published in hardcove! 
uy will be publishing C.J. snes es Duchess of Oklahoma, hard ané © 
thal 
Which reminds me 
The Women’s Press over there . weit the women are Yanks like ae 
Hadin Elgin and Joanna Rus 
too, Jos own Headline House © © : fe why the mited to Fantasy. That's why !"* 
2 McC} 
Have I mentioned pare Cour 
chaps hired Jo. 
frey, across the 
sence 1 » Wicklow? She writes Scien * ridins 
though I've seen her folk 
  
  
  
\ 
  
oY 
ie”

  
  
dragons; her books sell by the case, 
| whichever. 
aw nfused? ‘Course you are. Just 
ull off that hat if you pass A Wizard 
| of Earthsea, and you'll be all right. 
| Now, here's a guide-book for you, The 
| Language of the Night. Mind you, fold 
back the maps. 
All women? Not on your luck! 
pidntt I tell you J grew up in Fantasy? 
| Jack Vance brought me, with The Dy- 
ing Earth. He's still rolling on The 
| Green Pearl. Clark Ashton Smith 
brought him, Id imagine, and Mike 
| Moorcock and Steve Donaldson have 
brought thousands more. 
; What's going on in Fantasy now? 
| Say, youd make old Bottom laugh! 
| You mean you haven't noticed Fan- 
| tasys invading your own place? It is. 
You might write your kin; tell ‘em to 
put food away. Have a look at The 
Sun, the Moon, and the Stars; The 
Mask of the Sun; and New York by 
Knight.11 Every one's laid right in 
your own world and your own time. 
Who reads it? Who don't! I asked 
Robert of the Vineyard Mountain’? — 
oh, you understand that, do you? See 
how wise youre becoming? | asked 
Bob and many another book-seller, 
and that’s all the answer | could get. 
Horror’s mostly ladies and Science Fic- 
tion's mostly men. But Fantasy gets 
them all, from the teenager you think 
might mug you to the retired 
school-teacher. 
Why's it going so strong since 
Tolkien? Maybe that’s the wrong ques- 
tion. It's old, | told you—old as writ- 
ing, anyhow, and maybe old as talk. 
| When you see a lad come out of the 
| mall with a Jack Chalker book, you 
| probably don’t consider that he's going 
‘| to read the sort of thing Caracalla’ 
| relaxed with in the bath, but he is. 
| Next time you get to Walden’s, ask 
| yourself what's there that would make 
| Brian Boru and Richard the Lion- 
| Hearted think of home. Perhaps the 
“question's not why Fantasy’s doing well 
but why it wasn't doing better 
when it's done so well since the 
    
   
    
   
   
   
  
     
   
   
    
   
     
    
   
  
heory’s that Tolkien woke 
g, poking around in the old 
see you don't think much of 
e you'll think again when you 
here longer. Preparation’s what 
say, for theres many coming 
fo Earth that’s never really been 
No, it wasn’t a writer told me; 
looking into Scientific Amer- 
- gene-splicing and such-like. 
«best explanation might be 
Budrys—John Sentry he 
stories of the other sort 
meee ae Science Fiction: “A pea enial of the supernatural J oie as to be an affirmation of me” a testament to the terror e into any Overt thought that ap- a reality may be transient, and i e correct Tules of behavior may ave become ineffectual at any mo- ment. That is, descriptive fiction ma largely be an insane art, servin - lend a meretricious permanence a self-circumscribed universe.” He's ae of the Writers of the Future series. makes you think, don't it? You'll want to read the papers. Locus® and Science Fiction Chronicle} 
are both good. Fantasy Review's!” col- 
    
    
lege professors mostly, but some like 
it. Avalon to Camelot}® sticks with 
Malory, T.H. White, and Mary Stew- 
art, by and large—the Round Table 
Circle: but it’s fine for them. The Brit- 
ish Fantasy Society's’? worth joining 
just to get the publications. 
Good-bye, and a safe passage to 
the Grey Havens. You can point your 
feather with that sword, if you've no 
knife. But ‘ware the knives of others! 
For the manner, study the masters; for 
the matter touch none but your own. 
Blood blacked with smoke's a good 
ink, but the blood must be yours, 
mind. Work hard, and recollect you'll 
be measured against Homer. my 
eee 
4-1936), English 
and critic, the author of 
fantasies, including The 
Thursday, The Return 
The Ball and the 
poleon of Notting 
    
1. G.K. Chesterton (187 
journalist 
numerous 
Man Who Was 
of Don Quixote, 
Cross, and The Na 
Hill. 
2. Judy-Lynn del 
Vice-President and 
Rey Books [a divis 
Rey (1943-1986), 
d Publisher of Del 
ion of Ballantine 
    
Books/ Random House], publisher of JR.R. Tolkien, Stephen R. Donaldson Marion Zimmer Bradley, Terry Brooks, and many other well-known writers. _ 
3. 1984, of course. 
4.Down Town, by Viido Polikarpus 
and Tappan King (Arbor House, 1985 
Tor Books 1987). It is a young adult 
fantasy about a magic world beneath 
New York City. 
5. Tom Doherty, 
Books. 
6. The Chronicles of Narnia, CS. 
Lewis's classic children’s fantasy. 
publisher of Tor 
7. The legendary pulp magazine of 
eerie fiction, currently in its fourth in- 
carnation as a limited edition magazine 
from Terminus Publishing Co., PO. 
Box 13418, Philadelphia PA 19101. 
U.S. Subscriptions $18 a year. 
8. Beth Meacham, Editor-in-Chief of 
Tor Books. 
9. A world-renowned expert on the art 
of storytelling, Jane Yolen is the author 
of over a hundred books—most fan- 
tasy—and has recently been re-elected 
President of the Science Fiction Writers 
of America. 
10. Jo Fletcher, co-founder of the Brit- 
ish Fantasy Society. 
11. The Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, 
by Steven Brust (Ace). The Mask of 
the Sun, by Fred Saberhagen (Tor), 
New York By Knight, by Esther M. 
Friesner (NAL). 
12. Robert Weinberg, Book Dealer, 
PO. Box 423, Oak Forest IL 60452. 
13. The Roman Emperor Marcus Aure- 
lius Antonius; his name was originally 
Septimius Bassianus Caracalla. 
14. Volume III, edited by Algis Budrys 
(Bridge Publications), is currently 
available in most bookstores. 
15. Locus Publications, PO. Box 13305, 
Oakland CA 94661. U.S. subscriptions 
$24 a year via second class mail. 
  
16. Science Fiction Chronicle, Box 
4175, New York NY 10163. UW.S\ subs 
scriptions $23.40 a year. 
17. Fantasy Review, PO. Box 3000, 
Denville NJ 07834. U.S. subscriptions 
$27.95 a year. | 
    
  
   
        
   
  
scriptions $20 a year. 
19. The British Fantasy 
Stanley Rd., Marden, Su 
England. U.S. membership
