 

READING FRIENDS WHEN THEY WISH TO SHOW THEM THE GENRE’SPOSSIBILITIES. WOLFE’S FOUR-VOLUME THE BOOK OF THE NEW SUN 1S REGARDEDAS A MASTERPIECE, AND HIS LONG AND CELEBRATED CAREER ALSO INCLUDES SUCHNOVELS AS PEACE AND SOLDIER IN THE MIsT, AND THE Wortp Fantasy Awarp-
WINNING COLLECTION STOREYS FROM THE OLD HorTet. His MOST RECENT NOVELS
ARE THE KNIGHT AND ITS SEQUEL, THE WiIzarp.
WOLFE — AN ARDENT SUPPORTER OF THE Comic Book LecaL DEFENSE Funp —COLLABORATED WITH GAIMAN ON A WALKING TOUR OF THE SHAMBLES [AMERICAN
Fantasy, 2002] - THEIR MACABRE “TOUR BOOK,” PUBLISHED FOR THE CHICAGOWor.p Horror Convention.
THE FOLLOWING INTERVIEW Was CONDUCTED AT THE 28TH Wor.p Fantasy
CONVENTION IN MINNEAPOLIS. WOLFE WAS CELEBRATING HIS WEDDING ANNIVERSARY
DURING THAT LONG WEEKEND, BUT SHARED SOME OF HIS TIME ON THE LAST NIGHT
OF THE CONVENTION.
Neil remarked in a recentinterview [Weird Tales 320] that at the end ofthe day he isprobably “in the Stephen King camp” — a “storyteller,” As opposed to a “risk-taker’likeR.A. Lafferty, Robert Aickman, Avram Davidson, or Gene Wolfe. Whatis your opinionofNeil’s work?
How do you think he became such a master ofdialogue?
I don’t think we can say anything in the way of training or experience
—
it’s inborntalent.
An earfor it?
GENEWOLFE 275

Neil’s gotit. I recently saw
to whatthose people are saying. Whe
well, it looks so easythatthere’s noartto it. AndNeil is like that.
HowdidAWalkingTourofthe Shambles come about?
Somebody,Ithinkit wasBobGarcia, gotintouchwithNeil andsaid, “I'd like you
andGenetocollaborate onabookto besold atWorldHorror.”AndNeil said,“Yes,Til
“Wow, Neil Gaiman!Itwould be great fun to work
do it if Genewill do it.” I thought, )
with himbecauseI like Neil andIknowthat he is damn, damngood.” Anditwasfar
outthree times morefun than I expected. It was
easier than I expected anditwas ab
a blast. Somepeople, I think, have enjoyed the book
a
lot, probably somehave been
ble. Butwehadawonderfultimewriting
disappointedinit; thatsortofthing is inevita
it, andtrying to top each other and makeupfantastic stuff, andtake somelittle thing
Neil came up with
a
list of ideas that he thoughtwe mightwantto do. Onewas
a dictionary, one was a guidebook, one was an almanac, and so on.
I
said, “Well,
Jet’s do the guidebook.” So if you wanttogive credit, credit Neil for coming up with
all the original ideas. WhatI did was pick something out of this list that seemedto
me to have more promise than the other things did. It seemed to me, for example,
that an almanacwouldbe awfully limited as long as it remained an almanac. Andthe
dictionary thing has been done by a numberofpeople already — I think Ambrose
Bierce was probably the first one. He wrote The Devil’s Dictionary, which is a very
skeptical take onlife andthings.
Didall ofNeil’s ideas have anEdward Gorey-CharlesAddamsfeel to them? Thatsense
ofhumorthatfilled thefinal work?
Yes, that’s certainly the kind of thing that we came out with, but I don’t think
that either of us knewfor sure that that was whatwewere going to do. That’s what
workedout. Hejuststarted outbysaying, “Let's do adictionary or atravelbookor an
almanac, aguide to a neighborhood,orsomethinglikethat.”
So the only common theme amongthese ideas was—since this was donefor the 2002
WorldHorror Convention —the macabre?
Yes, well, that’s the thing. Wecould have done the samething and doneserious
horrorifthathadbeen ourbent. Butwedecidedwewouldjust have alot offunwith
it. Anditwas
a
lotoffun.Itwas,youknow—the CerealHouse,theBlindMan’sHouse,
and all that. The cover [byGahanWilson]istremendous.
Neil commentedinhis onlinejournal that he'd always enjoyed Gahan Wilson cartoons
andnowhe was able to be aGahan Wilson cartoon.
Yes, I think everybody doeslike Gahan Wilson cartoons. By the way, are you
familiar with the radio play that they did of “The Tree is MyHat” at World Horror
Convention?
2:76 HANGING OUTWITH...

Has that one been collected yet?
It isn’t in any of my collections, it’In that radio play, Neil plays the Rev
td, that “the only truecommunication is between equals.” I suppose that could be modtfied to “truecollaboration.”
GENE WOLFE 277

I don’t know. I would have some hesitation about that. Obviously you're
going to have to define what you mean by “equals,” and what you mean by “true
collaboration.”
As you said, a working relationship in which one partner doesn’t completely dominate
the other one.
Yes, or dominate the other one to the point where the other one rebels. And,
of course, if one partner is very dominant, the partner will start thinking, “Well, it’s
really about ninety-percent me, but I’m only going to getfifty percent of the credit,
and fifty percent of the money. Not avery good deal for me,is it?”
Yesterday, here at the World Fantasy Convention, you and Neil appeared on a panel
together. Neil mentioned a couple ofhis Sandman stories and you instantly knew
which ones he was referring to. There was a sizeable numberofpeople on that panel,
but I didn’t notice any other panel member reacting as quickly to the stories Neil
mentioned. And since you wrote the introduction to the Sandman collection Fables and
Reflections, I guess it’s safe to say you're a bigfan of that series.
Yes. I’m a big fan of Neil Gaiman’s.I will read just about anything he writes,if I
can find time to doit and if my eyes will hold up. I’m at the point now where I can read
for maybeahalf an houror an hour; and I haveto take a break because I can’t see the
print any more. When I was a young man, I could read eight hours a day. Andit’s no
longer physically possible for me. And,of course, I have my own work to do.
hares with Neil’s is an interest in gods and in religion.
Oneofthe things your work s
Where do you think the two ofyou agree in your depictions ofgods, and where do you
think you differ?
I’m not sure that we differ at
sort of a given.
all, to be honest. We differ theologically, but that’s
How do you differ theologically?
Well, ’'m a Christian, and I don’t think that Neil is a Christian.I believe in the
divinity of Christ. I don't believe that Neil does. Now, maybe I'm wronging him, but
my guessis that he does not. But I think both of us agree in the existence of God,
and in a God whois ultimately unknowable. If God hasan infinite mind, then human
beings are not capable of understanding that mind. And we're never going to be
capable of understanding that mind. We can go five-hundred years into the future and
have computers that are a whole helluvalot better, but they’restill not going to be able
to comprehendan infinite mind. Weneedto relate to God in a way that’s satisfactory
to both parties, and to adjust our behavior in a way that’s satisfactory to God as well
as us.
And I think Neil and I agree on those thin
I wouldstill like him and he would still be a
that we’re that far apart.
I was a friend of Isaac Asimov's. Isaac Asimov would probably have considered
himself an agnostic, although he might have called himself an atheist — that did not
preventus from being friends. But it did mean that we had some serious philosophical
differences. It seems to me that you can almost define civilizati
gs. If Neil were an atheist or an agnostic,
heck of a good writer, but I don't think
2.78 HANGING OUT WITH...

to be honest with the reader, that’S what you do. The other thing is pretendin , andmaybethat’s allowable in certain ,
, or people-with-one-foot-in-each-camp
just in the human soul. If you assume
GENE WOLFE 279

e other groups are not really worth looking at very hard,
that my groupis right and th y
you get very limited, and that doesn't make for good writing.
Since we’re talking about religion, “Murder Mysteries” comes to mind. In Neil’s short
_ that attempt to challenge the reader. It's
stories one often sees — as one does in yours it at
perhaps most evident in “Murder Mysteries,” which ts one of his most highly regarded
tales.
Yes, one of the best stories I ever read.
ur influence in thatstory. Are you aware of- or has Neil
I think I can see some ofyo
h he’s been influenced by your work?
spoken to you of- how muc
He’s read a lot of me. I know that. I don’t know how much he’s been influenced.
j
i e read. I’m influenced,
mentioned earlierthat tf a person is reading a
Neil commented in that interview I
” it’s theirfault somehow. “Go back and readit
Gene Wolfe story and not ‘getting it,
again,” he says, “you'll get there.”
They may be working very hard. They’re just not getting the answer. I’m an
engineerby training, and I have good third-rate mathematical talent. I got very good
grades in mathematics, up until I got into the higher reachesof calculus, and whenI
hit the wall. Mytalent had carried me as far asit
got up into differential equations,|
would carry me. And from now on, I was having
a
terrible time getting anywhere with
it, because, as I say, I have good third-rate ability. Alice Bentley, who is a bookseller
here in the huckster room,canhandle high-energy physics.I couldn’t do that.
You could fool me, from the level ofyour writing.
I might fake you into thinking that I could, because when you're writing you learn
how to cram up on a subject, and learn the things that you need to know to write the
story. I was asked,a few months ago, how muchresearchI did before I began writing
in writing the story and
a story. The answeris “Almost none,” because whatI dois begi
then find out whatit is that I need to know as I go throughthe story, and so I do the
research in parallel with the writing, not reading twenty books and then sitting down
and writing the story, but writing the story and stopping to page through twenty books
to find the facts I want.
When you write a short story, do you find you do most of the research while writing the
first draft?
How many drafts do you tendto do?
At least three. And often more than three. Fouror five — not uncommon.
280 HANGING ouT WITH...

Are any ofthese handwritten?
— shesaid, “You keep on doing what you been doing and you’re gonna keepon gettin’what you beengettin’.” And we don’t have to keep on doing what we’ve been doing.Wecan do somethingelse if we don’t like what we're gettin’. I think a lot of the purposeof fiction oughtto be totell peoplethat.
To help them achievea kind ofNirvana?
Yes. To free yourselffrom the wheel, and you'll becomeat one with God or Brahma
trying to turn the knob with his front paws. And I thought, “Has he always been adog?” It makes me wonder... There are things like that that you wonder about.
GENEWOLFE 28]
