Bridgewater State University
Virtual Commons - Bridgewater State University
Honors Program Theses and Projects Undergraduate Honors Program
5-10-2016
An Examination of Gene Wolfe's The Book of the
New Sun: Literary and Mythological Significance
Tyler Garvey
Follow this and additional works at: http://vc.bridgew.edu/honors_proj
Part of the English Language and Literature Commons
This item is available as part of Virtual Commons, the open-access institutional repository of Bridgewater State University, Bridgewater, Massachusetts.
Recommended Citation
Garvey, Tyler. (2016). An Examination of Gene Wolfe's The Book of the New Sun: Literary and Mythological Significance. In BSU
Honors Program Theses and Projects. Item 162. Available at: http://vc.bridgew.edu/honors_proj/162
Copyright © 2016 Tyler Garvey
 
 
 
An Examination of Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun: 
Literary and Mythological Significance 
 
 
Tyler Garvey 
 
 
Submitted in Partial Completion of the  
Requirements for Departmental Honors in English 
 
Bridgewater State University 
 
May 10, 2016 
 
 
Dr. Matt Bell, Thesis Director 
Dr. Kathleen Vejvoda, Committee Member 
Dr. Anne Doyle, Committee Member 
 
 
  Garvey  
 
2 
Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun is an enigmatic and labyrinthine text that 
demands that the reader solve its mysteries. Everything is written but little is clear. 
Powerful symbols are evoked to bewilder and astonish, while the reader is guided by a 
narrator who forgets nothing and himself suggests a rereading, compelling one to turn 
back the pages to compare the smallest of details. The imagination quickens at the poetry 
of this narrator whose sensitivities are at once immediately familiar and surprisingly 
penetrating, the fantasies found here never suggesting something less than significance. 
The mysteries to be resolved align themselves in imprecise forms identified with vastly 
outdated words and phrases; religious devices and hard scientific perspectives are 
intermingled in the construction of a narrative that would appear to entertain either 
interpretation. To illuminate the mythological and symbolic power of this text is the 
purpose of this examination of The Book of the New Sun, responding to a critical reading 
written by Peter Wright, a reading that touts intentional authorial misleading as the basis 
of its naturalistic conclusion. 
Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun is a science-fantasy series, a genre that 
combines elements of traditional science fiction and fantasy, of five volumes: a tetralogy 
composed of The Shadow of the Torturer (1980), The Claw of the Conciliator (1981), 
The Sword of the Lictor (1982), The Citadel of the Autarch (1983); and a coda titled The 
Urth of the New Sun (1987). It is a curious and almost occult body of writing, receiving 
speculation and praise upon its initial release but quickly fading into the background of 
contemporary literature. This is due largely to its status as a work of science fiction that 
crosses over into fantasy, its place in genre fiction denying The Book of the New Sun the 
attention of many readers who are plagued by assumptions, often rightly, of the tropes 
  Garvey  
 
3 
and stereotypes that such works perpetuate for the interests of a niche demographic. In 
his review of the classic science-fiction novel Stranger in a Strange Land (Robert A. 
Heinlein, 1961), Ronald Lee Cansler offers an accurate depiction of the challenges facing 
the genre: 
Once, the term “science fiction” conjured up the image of a thirteen-year-
old, pimply faced boy charging over a hill in a vacant lot, blasting away at 
Bug-Eyed-Monsters while wearing a plasticized “space helmet” and toting 
a chromed “ray gun”. Now, however, science fiction has come of age and 
does not need to be defended to most readers as a viable and important 
form of literature…However, science fiction still deserves more attention, 
both as a literary genre and in relation to individual works. Accordingly, 
the discussion now turns to science fiction as a literary medium with valid 
approaches, great and often fulfilled potential for social criticism, and high 
entertainment value…(98)  
The image of the little boy reveling in the pure fantasy of childhood in conjunction with 
one of the garishly illustrated novels of science fiction is sufficient grounds for dismissal 
for many seeking an engaging reading experience, and unfortunately this causes many 
accomplished texts to be overlooked. Cansler continues by saying “…I must admit that 
science fiction has been, is, and shows no indication of becoming anything other than, a 
minor literary form” (98). This review comes from an issue of the Journal of Popular 
Culture published in 1972, and so Cansler has been proven correct. So amidst this literary 
and cultural atmosphere, how is The Book of the New Sun to be regarded, and how have 
those open to a reading that goes beyond the cover art received it? John Clute, literary 
  Garvey  
 
4 
reviewer and vocal supporter of Wolfe and his work, says it best in his review “The Urth 
and All Its Glory”: 
[If] Gene Wolfe is to be taken seriously—and however thrilling or 
pleasing [The Book of the New Sun] may seem, there is simply no point at 
all in thinking of its author as a creator of mere speculative 
entertainment—then he must be taken as attempting something analogous 
to Dante’s supreme effort [The Divine Comedy]. With great urgency, layer 
after layer, he has created a world radiant with meaning, a novel that 
makes sense in the end only if it is read as an attempt to represent the 
Word of God. How intimate—how dizzyingly remote —how comforting 
or alienating that Word can be, each reader will of course discover. (478) 
Clute evokes a Judeo-Christian reading here with reference to the Word of God, a reading 
based on notable evidence, but a theological reading that limits the scope of the entire 
mythological picture. That being said, Clute’s comparison of Wolfe’s work with Dante’s 
is high praise, and the assertion of Wolfe’s purpose in writing The Book of the New Sun 
accurately pinpoints the goal of this 20th-century novel in several parts. In his review Bob 
Collins notes, “Wolfe’s achievement, though, is nothing less than the mythic conflation 
of the whole of human drama, something the ‘first reader’ of such a book may sense, but 
no review can possibly summarize” (478). Clute and Collins both make mention of a 
“mythic conflation” of sorts taking place beneath the fantastic aesthetic of Wolfe’s 
writing, and both acknowledge the difficulty of this understanding amidst the “dizzyingly 
remote” devices Wolfe employs in its enacting. There is strangeness, deceptiveness to 
this text that inspires a curiosity, a curiosity justified in the properties of its pursuit, those 
  Garvey  
 
5 
being a rereading, the study of mythology, the study of science, and an examination of 
the readers’ own perceptions of themselves and of the world. Somtow Sucharitkul 
remarks in a review of the third volume:  
In a very real sense, it is this very familiarity, not the baroque weirdness of 
its textures, that makes Sword of the Lictor so powerful. For Wolfe never 
loses sight of his sources, his mythical resonances. It is his classical 
adherence to that most ancient of literary structures, the finding of self 
within a journey through fantastical and ever-widening landscapes, that 
pushes the book beyond eccentricity into greatness. (476) 
There is an encrypted knowledge to be gleaned from Wolfe’s words, and from a story set 
in a far future world of myth and fantasy, and as Sucharitkul makes clear, the seeking of 
this knowledge is joyous because of the readily apparent credibility the text displays. To 
return briefly to Cansler: “Historically, the extraordinary, the supranatural has been found 
more worthy of consideration in the telling of great tales than has the mundane existence 
of trivial lives in the ‘real’ world” (98).  Wolfe knows this well, and so does the boy 
leading a charge with ray gun in hand, for children have no predisposition to the 
overwhelming veracity of the perceived world. The Book of the New Sun could not be the 
thoughtful and poetic work that it is without its fantasy and its willingness to trust in 
symbols. 
To best appreciate that symbolic vitality, one must be oriented within Wolfe’s 
world. The Book of the New Sun introduces Severian, a man who claims perfect and 
complete memory, recounting his own history years after the events of the novels, writing 
the narrative entirely in the first person. With his mnemonic condition he assures the 
  Garvey  
 
6 
reader that nothing has been left out or corrupted by time and forgetfulness. The story 
takes place on the world of Urth, a name that is symbolic of the brutalized and culturally 
barren landscape that Earth has become millions of years in the future. Humankind has 
journeyed to the stars and beyond, returning to Urth to languish and degenerate, the 
evidence of the might once displayed serving only to mystify and serve the inhabitants of 
this world in fashions that betray the purpose of their construction. Derelict spacecrafts 
are referred to as towers; the cities, the mountains, and the terrain of Urth are adorned 
with majestic art and objects of achievement standing forlorn and misunderstood, while 
beneath this cornucopia of humanity the actual beings reassume a simple existence. 
Culture is not completely absent, but like the advanced knowledge much of it is hidden 
and coveted by the elite, the extraterrestrial, and the sycophantic. The Commonwealth is 
the center of the plot, an expanse of mountains, rivers and pampas bordered on either side 
by the ocean, home to the vast cities of Nessus and Thrax. The prevailing ideology of the 
Commonwealth is a faith in the Conciliator and the New Sun, a religion centered around 
a belief that the dying sun that hangs in the sky will be regenerated by a savior who can 
negotiate the miraculous between the beings that sail between the stars and the humble 
citizens of Urth. The “old sun” in the sky is a brooding red, weak for lack of energy, the 
stars of farther galaxies visible in the atmosphere even in the light of day. Its diminished 
state reflects the people who live under it. The coming of the New Sun will flood the 
Urth, cleansing it of its impurities and giving rise with the abatement of the deluge to a 
rejuvenated people and culture. This religion serves to structure the reader’s perception of 
  Garvey  
 
7 
the novel, serves as a common thread to tie the wide cast of characters together, and 
ultimately appears prophetic or disingenuous through the actions of Severian.1 
Approaching the text of The Book of the New Sun requires great attention to every 
detail, of which there is an exhaustive supply. The text is riddled with information that 
sends the reader down many different paths, Wolfe’s extensive use of archaic diction and 
cryptic description elevating the stifling air of mystery to create an oppressive 
atmosphere of thought, and a shortness of interpretive breath that leaves the reader 
gasping for answers. Among Severian’s many extra-narrative musings emerge 
metafictional insights that offer lenses through which the text can be better observed. 
Towards the end of The Shadow of the Torturer, Severian discovers that he possesses the 
Claw of the Conciliator, and this discovery coincides with his and Dorcas’s witnessing 
the miraculous rising of a flaming cathedral above Nessus. This prompts a philosophical 
discussion between the two as they journey northward, and compels Severian to relate to 
Dorcas a story from the brown book he carries, which supposedly contains keys to the 
universe: 
Thecla and I used to read them and talk about them, and one of them was 
that everything, whatever happens, has three meanings. The first is its 
practical meaning, what the book calls, “the thing the plowman sees.” The 
cow has taken a mouthful of grass, and it is real grass, and a real cow—
that meaning is as important and as true as either of the others. The second 
is the reflection of the world about it. Every object is in contact with all 
others, and thus the wise can learn of the others by observing the first. 
                                                 
1 For a complete summary of The Book of the New Sun that addresses each of the five 
novels, turn to the Appendix beginning on page 33. 
  Garvey  
 
8 
That might be called the soothsayers’ meaning, because it is the one such 
people use when they prophesy a fortunate meeting from the tracks of 
serpents or confirm the outcome of a love affair by putting the elector of 
one suit atop the patroness of another…The third is the transsubstantial 
meaning. Since all objects have their ultimate origin in the Pancreator, and 
all were set in motion by him, so all must express his will—which is the 
higher reality. (Shadow, 190) 
To summarize then, objects are seen 1) as they appear before the naked eye, by simple 
observation; 2) through how they interact with the world about them and what 
significance is held through this interaction; and 3) through how their existence and its 
actions express the directions and intent of an omniscient will that governs all things. 
“The Book of the New Sun” is a religious text that exists within the fictional Book of the 
New Sun that is being examined here, and with that in mind there is a distinction present 
between Severian’s fictional readers, whom he addresses and may be assumed to be 
followers of the New Sun, and Wolfe’s readers in reality. This textual layering thus 
divides The Book of the New Sun into fictional scripture and a work of science fantasy, 
Severian’s dialogue above reflecting the interpretive practices of traditional exegesis, as 
exemplified by the early Christian theologian Origen: 
The individual ought, then, to portray the ideas of holy Scripture in a 
threefold manner upon his own soul; in order that the simple man may be 
edified by the “flesh,” as it were, of the Scripture, for so we name the 
obvious sense; while he who has ascended a certain way [may be edified] 
by the “soul,” as it were. The perfect man, again, and he who resembles 
  Garvey  
 
9 
those spoken of by the apostle…[may receive edification] from the 
spiritual law, which has a shadow of good things to come. For as man 
consists of body, and soul, and spirit, so in the same way does Scripture, 
which has been arranged to be given by God for the salvation of men. 
(1860) 
Origen’s writing is in direct correlation with the theory of interpretation found in “The 
Wonders of Urth and Sky,” the brown book from which Severian lifts the stories 
explaining keys to universal explanation. With this in mind the reader can comprehend 
the words he reads on the page, how they resonate with “The Book of the New Sun” as a 
whole, and the driving purpose of authorial intent and the apotheosis of the New Sun. 
The fact that the Severian writing this history as a fictional prophet is inhabited by many 
different minds and personalities by the time he becomes Autarch is even more 
significant given the nature of biblical authorship. The Bible as it is known likely had 
several different authors, redactors and scribes working with numerous pieces of writing 
to compose the unified text familiar to readers today. When it is learned that the Severian 
as Autarch is a multi-faceted being consisting of all of the previous Autarchs inhabiting 
Severian’s body, it complicates the narrative perspective, further evidence of this 
provided by Thecla’s memories interrupting the flow of the text uninhibited at numerous 
occasions, without warning or indication. The fictitious account then likely has many 
different authors, as does the Bible, marking the three-fold interpretive method as 
especially significant. 
The duality of this text is immediately acknowledged after Severian relates this 
story and its meta-implications. Speaking for the readers of The Book of the New Sun is 
  Garvey  
 
10 
Dorcas, when she responds to what Severian has told her, saying, “It seems to me that 
what you call the third meaning is very clear. But the second meaning is harder to find, 
and the first, which ought to be the easiest, is impossible” (Shadow, 191). On a first 
reading this rings especially true, with places and things being described in deceptive 
fashion and portentous events broadcasting solutions to a puzzle that is solved 
backwards. When Wolfe’s meaning does become clear and subsequent explorations 
illuminate clues and connections that develop the subtext with their unveiling, the objects 
and seemingly familiar story elements that have seemed innocuous at first begin to raise 
questions. Rather than denying the previous interpretive method and its religious 
implication Dorcas’s suggestion builds on it, acknowledging to the actual readers Wolfe’s 
omnipotence over his own story and urging a further analysis following the initial 
understanding.  Dividing Dorcas’s perceptive reaction from the asserted ideology of the 
brown book draws a severe line between approaches to this narrative, clarifying the gray 
area between miracles and artifice. In his naturalistic reading Peter Wright, a scholar 
whose work will later be examined in greater detail, utilizes Dorcas’s words to expose the 
tenuous nature of religious depiction in the text: 
Dorcas’s perspicacity emphasizes the process of adumbration at work 
within the human psyche. The people of the Commonwealth are so 
distanced from the reality of their universe by their need for a 
transcendental relevance that they cannot apprehend straightforward 
biological relationships through the imposed veils of superstition, 
personified by the soothsayers, and organized religious dogma, 
represented by a belief in the Pancreator. (76) 
  Garvey  
 
11 
Several characters certainly display this method of thinking, and this psychology 
importantly notes the imperfections of religious beliefs and how they can often work to 
conceal truths that are otherwise self-evident. Wright continues by noting that Wolfe is 
almost certainly counting on this same psychology affecting a certain reading 
demographic, remarking that “it seems probable that the reader will undergo the same 
degree of abstraction from fictive reality as a consequence of his or her corresponding 
sensitivity to mythic accounts of existence” (77). In this way Wolfe maintains the 
amorphous conclusions a reader is likely to draw from an initial reading, flirting with two 
extremes of universal explanation while offering just enough to push the argument in 
either direction, this argument largely being decided by the readers own predispositions.  
It is important to note Wolfe’s employment of deception and playful misleading, 
and that there are several clues to be found which inform the reader that what outcomes 
they might expect will be resolved in purposefully deviant fashion. The very first chapter 
would serve to be an outline that might cater to the expectations of the reader, who sees a 
darkly hooded man with a great sword on the novel’s cover, and could well expect to be 
entertained by formulaic fantasy. As the pages turn this illusion gives way to the 
meticulously constructed and original narrative, yet the initial impression does not fade 
completely, continuing to tug at the imagination of the reader as Dorcas might tug the 
soiled hem of Severian’s cloak, encouraging with warmth and knowledge what is 
expected while inviting the unfamiliar. Appropriately it is after Dorcas’s strange 
emergence that Severian’s narration turns to remark on the materialization of the foreign, 
a reflection inspired by his bewilderment at the sudden appearance of Dorcas’s floral 
headdress: 
  Garvey  
 
12 
Is it possible the flower came into being only because Dorcas reached for 
it? In daylight moments, I know as well as the next that such things are 
impossible; but I am writing by night, and then, when I sat in that boat 
with the hyacinth less than a cubit from my eyes, I wondered at the dim 
light and recalled Hildegrin’s remark of a moment before, a remark that 
implied…that the seeress’s cave, and thus this garden, was on the opposite 
side of the world. (Shadow, 147) 
A pale water hyacinth appearing in the hair of a bewildered girl, at her behest, “…the first 
flower I had seen in the Garden of Endless Sleep…” ( Shadow, 147), flings Severian north 
of the “waist of the world,” as he would call it, and allows him to share in the strangeness 
the reader has so far been oppressed by. The Shadow of the Torturer moves like a 
somnambulist through its opening episodes, crushing its reader with the ancient weight of 
archaic vocabulary unknown to most dictionaries, with frequent pauses and obscure 
reflections, and transitions so understated that when a climax comes it peaks and falls 
seemingly without incident. Wolfe knows what is expected, and this passage in the 
botanical gardens allows Severian the narrator to admit to the reader that the promised 
destination is seen through a fog some distance away, separated from the ground below 
the torturers boots by murky and dangerous waters. Severian uses his own education and 
the recurring celestial imagery to explain the dizzying task of orientation in The Book of 
the New Sun: 
There, [the opposite side of the world], as Master Malrubius had taught us 
long ago, all was reversed: warmth to the south, cold to the north; light at 
night, dark by day; snow in summer. The chill I felt would be appropriate 
  Garvey  
 
13 
then, for it would be summer soon, with sleet riding the wind; the darkness 
that stood even between my eyes and the blue flowers of the water 
hyacinth would be appropriate then too, for it would soon be night, with 
light already in the sky. (Shadow, 147) 
The reader understands the opposing climates and time zones as the conventional 
difference between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres of Earth, and thus Urth, but 
to Severian it is a greater difference, and serves as an oblique allusion to the persistent 
duality of interpretation. Severian sits wondering on his side of the world of the mystery 
of the other, and the reader may sit either with the narrator or in his own craft of thought 
on the other side of the world, wondering with equal validity at the enigma of an alternate 
perspective. 
 The basis for the scientific and purely rationalistic reading of The Book of the New 
Sun rests largely with Peter Wright’s Attending Daedalus: Gene Wolfe, Artifice and the 
Reader, an extensive and well-researched work of scholarship. Here Wright illuminates 
the breadth of Gene Wolfe’s work as an author through the 1990s, dedicating a 
significant section to the close study of The Book of the New Sun. Wright pays especial 
attention to Wolfe’s writing style, and the struggle to comprehend it. Wright remarks that 
“By changing generic codes, subverting traditional literary conventions, employing an 
unreliable narrator and exploiting the deflective effect of unfamiliar diction, Wolfe 
creates a text organized specifically to be understood, or at least appreciated, only by 
those readers who are willing to question their own literary assumptions, pause, reflect, 
and reread” (166). This observation of Wolfe’s writing rings true, especially the latter 
half of the statement. Acknowledging these devices of literary artifice, in the fifth chapter 
  Garvey  
 
14 
of the book Wright states his interpretation of The Book of the New Sun: “The story of 
The Urth Cycle describes a human race caught in two complex processes: that of an 
external cosmological conspiracy masterminded by the Hierogrammates, and that of its 
own psychological need for lenitive myths” (69). Wright examines these myths and the 
religious elements of Wolfe’s work to uncover the eugenic engineering of humanity by a 
race of higher beings, here titled the Hierogrammates, represented in The Urth of the New 
Sun by the characters Tzadkiel and Apheta, presented as male and female respectively in 
their primary manifestations and serving to guide Severian in a parental fashion through 
the orchestrated apotheosis. In his work Lexicon Urthus: A Dictionary for the Urth Cycle, 
in which the history and usage of Wolfe’s obscure vocabulary is clarified, Michael 
Andre-Driussi gives the following definition for Hierogrammate: “A sacred scribe, one of 
a lower order of the Egyptian priesthood; a writer of sacred records, specifically of 
hieroglyphics” (171). The moniker is appropriate then as the Hierogrammates indeed 
have a hand in the construction of the solar mythology that shapes The Book of the New 
Sun, yet Wright sees their role in this construction and the fulfillment of the mythos as 
strictly selfish, a way in which to ensure their own survival.  
Acknowledging that Tzadkiel, Apheta and their kind have used Severian and the 
humans of Urth to prevent their own degeneration leaves the spiritual essence of The 
Book of the New Sun feeling deceptive. The allusions and symbols that evoke the mythos 
of Christ, solar deities, and the esoteric practices of early South Americans are found 
repeatedly throughout the text, forming the base for and the conception of Severian’s 
apparent apotheosis. As Peter Wright has claimed in his purely secular reading of 
Wolfe’s series of novels, the trappings of spiritual lore serve only as a mechanism in the 
  Garvey  
 
15 
greater engineering of a submissive and ignorant human race, appealing to a deep-seated 
need for divine presence and prophecy. As he understands Wolfe’s design, “The success 
of the Hierogrammates’ clandestine strategies depends on their capacity to convince 
Severian of his own divinity and on the divine nature of their actions. This seduction is 
effected by Tzadkiel, who nurtures Severian’s faith by assuming the guise of an 
angel…and who employs suitably inflated, pseudo -religious rhetoric to account for the 
Hierogrammates’ actions” (79). In Wright’s opinion, the Hierogrammates are effectively, 
then, the authors of a false scripture and mysticism of Urth. Religion and spirituality have 
long been used by ruling bodies and governments to establish structure and order among 
people, its power and mystery providing justification for the peculiar instances of human 
life. The goal of Tzadkiel and Apheta, as proposed by Wright, is to effectively organize 
the beings of Urth into generating a representative appropriate for and adaptable to their 
purposes. Since the objective of the manipulation of those on Urth is to prevent the 
degeneration of a race, the foretelling of a New Sun and the various instances of 
theophany in the text are used as tools for selection. It is a bold reading based on a 
Darwinian, interstellar process of selection that is not without credibility. Wright’s 
reading is studied and thorough, but not final. To move into a broader interpretation of 
The Book of the New Sun, a working knowledge of mythological symbolism and its 
transcendent properties is required.  
 A reading of The Book of the New Sun that moves beyond the machinations of 
science-fiction, that views its construction and execution through the mythologies of 
Gene Wolfe and Severian alike, is greatly aided by Joseph Campbell’s 1949 work, The 
Hero with a Thousand Faces. To summarize briefly, Campbell’s writing details 
  Garvey  
 
16 
episodically the journey of the archetypal hero that is found across all cultures, in all 
periods of time throughout the world. This structure that Campbell illuminates is known 
as the monomyth, the one great story of man so much apart of his nature that its retelling 
is inevitable, albeit taking different forms and figurations internationally. “The standard 
path of the mythological adventure of the hero is a magnification of the formula 
represented in the rites of passage: separation-initiation-return: which might be named the 
nuclear unit of the monomyth” (23): this unit in its simplicity is utterly complete, and 
essential for the success of a symbolic story. Most evident from reading Campbell is the 
sheer power of myth, and its connection with dream symbols and human psychology are 
compelling in their implications. Campbell’s explanation of mythology moves beyond 
religion and the art of storytelling to something more essentially human, abstract in the 
forms and characters it adopts but therefore allowing for individual understanding. 
Campbell states, “It would not be too much to say that myth is the secret opening through 
which the inexhaustible energies of the cosmos pour into the human cultural 
manifestation. Religions, philosophies, arts, the social forms of primitive and historic 
man, prime discoveries in science and technology, the very dreams that blister sleep, boil 
up from the basic, magic ring of myth” (1). It is an absolute statement, but one that 
proves invaluable in reading The Book of the New Sun and approaching a working 
navigation of its structure, symbols, philosophical interludes, and cerebral dream 
episodes that hang on the page with an arch significance that is yet too obscure to assume 
any complete picture of clarity. In the opening chapter of The Shadow of the Torturer, 
Severian makes an observation that touches on this notion: “Certain mystes aver that the 
real world has been constructed by the human mind, since our ways are governed by the 
  Garvey  
 
17 
artificial categories into which we place essentially undifferentiated things, things weaker 
than our words for them. I understood the principle intuitively that night… ” (Shadow, 
11). From the beginning Severian insinuates the fact that he has an understanding of 
concepts and constructs essential to humanity that in their complexity render language 
astoundingly overwrought. What the mythology that Campbell examines accomplishes in 
its deceptive simplicity is directly analogous to the religious and mythical systems 
displayed and cycled in The Book of the New Sun. Severian and therefore Wolfe 
understand this, and trust the reader to reach this understanding themselves. 
 Of the multitudinous instances of duality, the incident of the rising cathedral is 
one that Wolfe establishes in the esoteric sense but then later deconstructs with rational 
thought. Prefacing this miraculous vision is Severian’s discovery of the Claw of the 
Conciliator, and the fact that what follows appears so portentous lends it a great 
significance. As Severian and Dorcas wonder at the Claw, they see the following: 
“Hanging over the city like a flying mountain in a dream was an enormous building—a 
building with towers and buttresses and an arched roof. Crimson light poured from its 
windows. I tried to speak, to deny the miracle even as I saw it; but before I could frame a 
syllable, the building had vanished like a bubble in a fountain, leaving only a cascade of 
sparks” (Shadow, 188). The vision is nothing short of spectacular, and it is an instance of 
theophany that sets the tone of the religious narrative that henceforth becomes more 
closely woven into the text. In the following novel however, this event is downplayed 
into the mundane, through passing conversation with a nameless character no less. At the 
festival in Saltus, Severian questions an elderly woman about the location of the 
  Garvey  
 
18 
Pelerines, a religious organization whose temporary abode was the cathedral of the 
vision. The old woman confirms the rising, but explains it thus: 
“When my grandson-in-law heard about it, he was fairly struck flat for 
half a day. Then he pasted up a kind of hat out of paper and held it over 
my stove, and it went up, and then he thought it was nothing that the 
cathedral rose, no miracle at all. That shows what it is to be a fool—it 
never came to him that the reason things were made so was so the 
cathedral would rise just like it did. He can’t see the Hand in nature.” 
“He didn’t see it himself?” I asked. “The cathedral, I mean.” 
She failed to understand. “Oh, he’s seen it when they’ve been through 
here, at least a dozen times.” (Claw, 229) 
As the cathedral was made of canvas, its rising into the air could be explained through 
simple science. As the old woman understands however, this explanation does not 
discredit the event entirely or mark it as trivial. Unlike Severian, the young man who 
burned the paper did not witness the cathedral rising himself, and therefore the power of 
the vision was never presented to him. For Severian the sight is a turning point, and it 
serves to make whole his relationship with Dorcas. As he explains, “It was only after the 
vision of that great building hanging, then vanishing, above the city, that I knew I had 
come to love Dorcas…And because our thoughts were entirely of what we had seen, our 
spirits embraced without hindrance, each passing through those few seconds of vision as 
if through a door never previously opened and never to be opened again” (Shadow, 189). 
The metaphysical interplay of their two “spirits” is significant, and this intimacy inspires 
the philosophical conversation between them referenced above.   
  Garvey  
 
19 
Miracles occur in several instances throughout The Book of the New Sun through 
the use of the mysterious Claw of the Conciliator, ‘...the most precious of gems” 
(Shadow, 29). If Severian is a thaumaturge then the Claw is his instrument, although an 
inconsistent one. Raising those seeming dead back to life and healing severe injuries are 
actions that it inspires, but it does not perform on every occasion. For each acknowledged 
success there are a number of failures, and Severian is never sure when he attempts to 
draw forth its power that he will accomplish what he wishes. The gem itself is revered, a 
recognized religious relic, yet as with all things in The Book of the New Sun there is 
another explanation for its revered status and capabilities. Dorcas proposes this theory as 
to the comprehension of its powers: 
Severian, when you brought the uhlan back to life it was because the Claw 
twisted time for him to the point at which he still lived. When you half 
healed your friend’s wounds, it was because it bent the moment to one 
when they would be nearly healed. And when you fell into the fen in the 
Garden of Endless Sleep, it must have touched me or nearly touched me, 
and for me it became the time in which I had lived, so that I lived again. 
But I have been dead. For a long, long time I was dead, a shrunken corpse 
preserved in the brown water. (Sword, 60) 
So the argument that the Claw is no more than a device through which time is distorted is 
proposed, and given the fact that movements back and forth through time are possible in 
this story, it is not without its merit. Peter Wright suggests, “all of the apparently mystical 
incidents that the artefact propagates can be accounted for rationally by appealing to the 
physical and scientific laws operative in Wolfe’s fictional heterocosm” (82), Wright 
  Garvey  
 
20 
understands the Claw as an enigmatic mechanism functioning within the established 
system of cross-dimensional travel. The final analysis of the relic Wright offers is that 
“The Claw’s reanimatory and curative properties arise from its functions as the focal 
point of a localized time-travel field, directing massive amounts of energy from the White 
Fountain through Severian. The Claw is, therefore, the locus for a power external to 
Severian” (83). The energy that the Claw uses does indeed come from an external source, 
but this examination leaves Severian an unremarkable conductor of the direction of this 
energy. 
 Ultimately the Claw is symbolic, and with the knowledge that the greatest role 
Severian will play will be that of the Conciliator himself, any mechanistic assumptions of 
the utility of the Claw are irrelevant. Furthering his thinking on the Claw, Wright makes 
note of an acknowledgement made in The Urth of the New Sun: “When Apheta suggests 
that the Claw’s ability to channel energy from the White Fountain arises from its 
immersion in Severian’s blood…there is clearly an equation being drawn between blood 
and the Claw’s potency” (83). What this observation accomplishes is the glorification of 
Severian’s blood, and that any phenomena the Claw as an object may be responsible for 
is rooted in the fact that it was immersed in the life of the Conciliator. Severian comes to 
realize the futility of attributing the power he has witnessed and stimulated to a mere 
talisman, for when he comes across the Claw of the Conciliator in a strange place, after 
already having returned it to the Pelerines, he is able to muse with lucidity on the reality 
of the eternal, omnipresent divine: 
What struck me on the beach and it struck me indeed, so that I staggered 
as at a blow—was that if the Eternal Principle had rested in that curved 
  Garvey  
 
21 
thorn I had carried about my neck across so many leagues, and if it now 
rested in the new thorn (perhaps the same thorn) I had only now put there, 
then it might rest in anything, and in fact probably did rest in everything, 
in every thorn on every bush, in every drop of water in the sea. The thorn 
was a sacred Claw because all thorns were sacred Claws; the sand in my 
boots was sacred sand because it came from a beach of sacred 
sand…everything had approached and even touched the Pancreator, 
because everything had dropped from his hand. Everything was a relic. All 
the world was a relic. I drew off my boots, that had traveled with me so 
far, and threw them into the waves that I might not walk shod on holy 
ground. (Citadel, 367) 
This often cited passage from The Citadel of the Autarch touches on a great many ideas, 
one of these being the principle of the entirety in the fragment, the individual piece, 
which resurfaces frequently throughout The Book of the New Sun. As Campbell suggests, 
“Because, finally, the All is everywhere, and anywhere may become the seat of power. 
Any blade of grass may assume, in myth, the figure of the savior and conduct the 
questing wanderer into the sanctum sanctorum of his own heart” (35). Severian is able to 
access miraculous energies not through the function of a time-travel device, but through 
the infinite channel of all of Urth. The White Fountain is indeed the external source of 
energy, yet it is an intimate part of Severian’s being, and all the world is an outlet for the 
expression of its power.  
  Garvey  
 
22 
 The White Fountain itself is the key by which the Conciliator unlocks the New 
Sun from within the old. It is a magnificent galactic appearance, immaculate and gravid 
with the energy of genesis, described with language astronomically abstract: 
You know of the chasms of space, which some call the Black Pits, from 
which no speck of matter or gleam of light ever returns. But what you 
have not known until now is that these chasms have their counterparts in 
White Fountains, from which matter and energy rejected by a higher 
universe flow in endless cataract into this one. If you pass—if our race is 
judged ready to reenter the wide seas of space—such a white fountain will 
be created in the heart of our sun. (Citadel, 364)   
So the projection of Master Malrubius explains to Severian, a nebulous description of its 
origin that ends with the conditions of its desired usage. Additionally it is marked as a 
boon, a gift to be allowed from him by whom “our race is judged,” namely the 
Hierogrammate Tzadkiel. Tzadkiel and his kin are powerful, but is the engineering of 
such a galactic spectacle theirs to initiate and then transfer? Referring to one of the dream 
episodes occurring in The Shadow of the Torturer, Peter Wright divorces Severian’s 
agency from the question: 
As the Hierogrammates’ marionette, Severian is powerless to oppose their 
schemes, even if he understood them fully, and his relative impotence is 
suggested by the description of his puppet counterpart as a “dust mote in a 
sunbeam.” Severian is just such a speck, caught in the swirling events that 
bring the White Fountain, like a sunbeam, into the heart of the old sun. His 
inability to gauge his role in the Hierogrammates’ strategies, and his own 
  Garvey  
 
23 
self-importance, are mocked at the conclusion of the puppets’ battle when 
his analogue’s empty victory over “the man of sticks” is celebrated with a 
derisive “flourish of toy trumpets.” (78) 
Expanding his theory on the eugenic conspiracy of the Hierogrammates, Wright paints 
the White Fountain as a device, a boon, that these beings may employ and bestow at will 
through their advanced technology. Severian only fits in because of his ideal biology, the 
human genetic material that will be required to sustain the Hierogrammates, and his 
pseudo-religious quest and journey of personal growth is bleakly reduced to an image of 
a pawn moving across a chessboard towards a sacrificial maneuver.  
 To move beyond this interpretation evokes Joseph Campbell’s mythological 
theory regarding the “World Navel,” a concept that forms “…the symbol of the 
continuous creation: the mystery of the maintenance of the world through that continuous 
miracle of vivification which wells within all things” (32). The White Fountain is 
certainly that, a surging force of light, life, and energy that in its union with a weakening 
sun might be said to provide “maintenance” to the ultimate source of vitality for the 
planet Urth. Applying this theory to the White Fountain however would acknowledge 
that “miracle of vivification which wells within all things,” in direct opposition to 
Wright’s theory based on the fictional and highly advanced scientific knowledge that 
could create spontaneously a massive galactic occurrence. Campbell continues by 
describing the release of this energy at the successful conclusion of a hero’s journey: 
The torrent pours from an invisible source, the point of entry being the 
center of the symbolic circle of the universe, the Immovable Spot of the 
Buddha legend, around which the world may be said to revolve…The tree 
  Garvey  
 
24 
of life, i.e., the universe itself, grows from this point. It is rooted in the 
supporting darkness; the golden sun bird perches on its peak; a spring, the 
inexhaustible well, bubbles at its foot. (32) 
Combining with the sun, “the center of the symbolic universe,” the White Fountain 
murmurs an endless spring at the feet of a “golden sun bird,” which roosts commandingly 
atop the crest of life energy supported in the wide night of outer space. The winged 
creature may seem to be the master of this force, and while it does hold rightly an 
importance, it is ultimately a herald for something greater than itself. 
 Following his escape from imprisonment in The Claw of the Conciliator, Severian 
comes across a short, bald, androgynous figure amidst a secret chamber of the House 
Absolute concealed by convoluted veils. Because Thecla’s mind and memories at this 
point are also Severian’s own, he recognizes this figure robed in yellow as none other 
than the Autarch. The ruler of the Commonwealth compels Severian to peer into a 
massive tome with pages like silvered glass, and an image is revealed to him: 
As he spoke, something shaped itself in shining air above the open pages. 
It was neither a woman nor a butterfly, but it partook of both, and just as 
we know when we look at the painted figure of a mountain in the 
background of some picture that it is in reality as huge as an island, so I 
knew that I saw the thing only from far off—its wings beat, I think, 
against the proton winds of space, and all Urth might have been a mote 
disturbed by their motion. Then as I had seen it, so it saw me…It paused 
and turned to me and opened its wings that I might observe them. They 
were marked with eyes. (Claw, 336) 
  Garvey  
 
25 
It is not until The Urth of the New Sun that this entity is revealed to be none other than 
Tzadkiel, assuming one shape of sex and form among many that he may choose at will. A 
beast of ethereal flight already then soars through the great sky of space, anticipating its 
ivory perch on a burgeoning fountain. It is the effect of this image on Severian’s 
countenance however that asserts his indisputable role, manipulative plots 
notwithstanding, in the creation and application of the White Fountain, for the Autarch 
“…handed me a clean cloth as he spoke, and I wiped my brow with it as he told me, 
because I could feel the moisture running down my face. When I looked at the cloth, it 
was crimson with blood” (Claw, 337). In meeting with a king and witnessing an 
emanation of great spiritual portent, Severian is adorned his own crown of thorns and 
blood flows from the top of his head. It is one of the more overt comparisons Wolfe 
makes to Christ using Severian, and returning to Campbell’s explanation of the “World 
Navel” the importance of this imagery here is observed as “…the figure [previously the 
sun bird] may be that of the cosmic man or woman…seated or standing on this spot, or 
even fixed to the tree [tree of life] (Attis, Jesus, Wotan); for the hero as the incarnation of 
God is himself the navel of the world, the umbilical point through which the energies of 
eternity break into time” (32). Recalling Wright’s own words about the importance of 
blood regarding the Claw of the Conciliator and the workings of the extraordinary, here is 
illustrated Severian’s individual significance before becoming Autarch, before judgment 
by the Hierogrammates, his dripping red life an indication of the independent divinity of 
the Conciliator.  
 Wright’s claims are continually brought back to the manipulative plan of the 
Hierogrammates, a plan that is vague and only briefly explained in The Urth of the New 
  Garvey  
 
26 
Sun. Severian attempts to articulate the goal of this plan to Gunnie, a woman who arrived 
with him on Yesod, yet he has trouble doing so, remarking that “The Hierarchs and their 
Hierodules—and the Hierogrammates too—have been trying to let us become what we 
were. What we can be….That’s their justice, their wh ole reason for being. They bring us 
through the pain we brought them through” (Urth, 159). This explanation expresses the 
notion that human beings will be brought through a process that will return them to the 
superior state of their race formerly expressed before Urth regressed, the evidence of 
greater men already surrounding Severian and those of his generation through the relics 
of achievements only an interstellar civilization could have hoped to gain. Apheta is 
present to listen to Severian’s conversation, and she responds with remarks of her own 
that provide further clarity: 
You in turn will make us go through what you did. I think you 
understand…Your race and ours are, perhaps, no more than each other’s 
reproductive mechanisms. You [Gunnie] are a woman, and so you say you 
produce your ovum so that there will someday be another woman. But 
your ovum would say it produces that woman so that someday there will 
be another ovum. We have wanted the New Sun to succeed as badly as he 
[Severian] has wanted to himself. More urgently, in all truth. In saving 
your race he has saved ours; as we have saved ours of the future by saving 
yours. (Urth, 159-60) 
Apheta’s comment about human beings and the Hierogrammates sharing a relationship 
akin to “reproductive mechanisms” becomes especially relevant, and her further 
comparison between the woman and her ovum is enlightening in the fact that it betrays 
  Garvey  
 
27 
the Hierogrammate psychology of the ends proving far more important than the means. 
This being said, the “ends” being described are not the immediate salvation of Apheta 
and Tzadkiel, the living generation of Hierogrammates, but the guarantee of a future for 
the entirety of their race, as well as that of human beings. Describing the ideology in this 
way lends an additional perspective to the consequences of the coming of the New Sun as 
well, for it is an aspiration for the greater good. The Hierogrammates and Severian, in 
addition to the common people of Urth, are aware that many will die with the birth of a 
New Sun and that Urth will be flooded and renewed through destruction, yet they justify 
this massive loss of life with what is depicted as the moral high ground. Regarding the 
Hierogrammates, Wright continues to see their plans as straightforward and selfish: 
Their apparently altruistic actions towards humanity, their granting of the 
boon of the New Sun, must be recognized as a Hierogrammate means to a 
Hierogrammate end; the (comparatively) short-term benefits conferred on 
Homo sapiens who, in all probability, will be destroyed together with the 
old universe, are merely the by-products of the Hierogrammates’ 
determination to ensure their own biological ascent. (72) 
The fact is, simply, that there is no probability or likelihood of complete human 
annihilation, as the New Sun arrives as planned and humanity continues, albeit depleted 
and in a more primitive fashion.  The old sun had to be violently revivified through the 
White Fountain, and the Urth of the old sun was destroyed as a result, yet the outcome is 
an Urth under the New Sun, an Urth that may continue. If the old sun had been allowed to 
sputter into galactic embers, the old Urth would have perished without hope for 
resurrection, bringing about what would have been the true end of humanity. 
  Garvey  
 
28 
 Returning to the allusion Aptheta made to the sexual congruency of humanity and 
the Hierogrammates, the creation of the White Fountain is remarkable. Wright has 
asserted that the phenomenon is a boon to be granted through the power of Tzadkiel, yet 
Wolfe’s description of its forming is framed in a far different setting, that of Apheta’s 
bedchamber: 
Her hands, her lips, her eyes, the breasts I pressed—all wondrous; but 
there was more, perhaps the perfume of her hair. I felt that I breathed an 
endless night…Lying upon my back, I entered Yesod. Or say, rather, 
Yesod closed about me. It was only then that I knew I had never been 
there. Stars in their billions spurted from me, fountains of suns, so that for 
an instant I felt I knew how universes are born. All folly. Reality displaced 
it, the kindling of the torch that whips shadows to their corners, and with 
them all the winged fays of fancy. There was something born between 
Yesod and Briah when I met with Apheta upon that divan in that circling 
room, something tiny yet immense that burned like a coal conveyed to the 
tongue by tongs. That something was myself. (Urth, 145) 
Briah being the universe in which Urth resides, what Severian feels so intimately as his 
own being, what is born between one universe and that of Yesod is the White Fountain. 
Severian describes as “folly” the notion that he understands how universes are born, and 
this is true, for what is born is not a universe but a galactic seed bearing life, and it must 
be couched within a solar womb. In his examination of an Irish myth, Campbell states: 
The bringing together of the two great symbols of the meeting with the 
goddess [here Apheta] and the fire theft [White Fountain] reveals with 
  Garvey  
 
29 
simplicity and clarity the status of the anthropomorphic powers in the 
realm of myth. They are not ends in themselves, but guardians, 
embodiments, or bestowers, of the liquor, the milk, the food, the fire, the 
grace, of indestructible life. (149) 
Apheta as mother-goddess here evokes an image of the Virgin Mary, in being a necessary 
vessel for the force of “indestructible life.” The Christian imagery is relevant here as 
Severian playing the role of Father in creating this force of life is also the Son, for by his 
own admission what is produced from his union with Apheta is also himself. With 
Wright’s argument in mind in relation to the above quote from Campbell one might 
connect the “bestowers” here with the Hierogrammates, granting them superiority in the 
exchange and causing this creation to be primarily their responsibility. However, with 
Severian finding himself in the White Fountain, there is no “bestowal” enacted at all, for 
the force of life that Severian gains from the universe of Yesod is merely himself, the 
essence of his life made manifest in galactic scale. As the Conciliator, Severian 
negotiates this essence, this power from a higher world to rejuvenate his own, beholden 
only to his own will and means.  
 By offering a solution to The Book of the New Sun that bestows on Gene Wolfe 
the role of a willful deceiver, the engineer of a puzzle solved only for its own sake, Peter 
Wright diminishes what the work does accomplish and points to a conclusion that is 
wholly dissatisfying. Wright claims: 
It is only by observing how he or she has been deceived and cajoled that 
the reader comes to appreciate more fully Wolfe’s vision of humanity as a 
helplessly subjective species dependent on the whim of manipulatory 
  Garvey  
 
30 
forces. That reader, in turn, may then recognize his or her position in an 
analogous system. (167) 
Here the use of archaic vocabulary and the structure of a plot that shows more than it tells 
are downgraded to devices of deception, tools to alter the reading experience and, if they 
are further examined through Wright’s lens, may just show that reader that their own 
reality is false and wrought with misunderstanding. The crux of this argument circles 
back to the machinations of the Hierogrammates, beings whose goals are actually aligned 
with Severian’s own. While it is eventually revealed that they had an influence “Above 
and beyond the ‘stage’ of the narrative’s plot…played out on Urth,” (70), the argument 
for their malevolent interference is based on insubstantial, conjectural claims. This 
argument also denies the mythological thrust of The Book of the New Sun, its utilization 
of symbols that hold a significant connection with the historical human psyche.  Joseph 
Campbell writes about how interwoven these symbols are with the human consciousness, 
and because of this relationship the strength and at times intimidating nature of these 
symbols: 
The unconscious sends all sorts of vapors, odd beings, terrors, and 
deluding images up into the mind—whether in dream, broad daylight, or 
insanity; for the human kingdom, beneath the floor of the comparatively 
neat little dwelling that we call our consciousness, goes down into 
unsuspected Aladdin caves. There not only jewels but also dangerous jinn 
abide: the inconvenient or resisted psychological powers that we have not 
thought or dared to integrate into our lives. And they may remain 
unsuspected, or, on the other hand, some chance word…may touch a 
  Garvey  
 
31 
magic spring, and then dangerous messengers begin to appear in the brain. 
These are dangerous because they threaten the fabric of the security into 
which we have built ourselves and our family. But they are fiendishly 
fascinating too, for they carry keys that open the whole realm of the 
desired and feared adventure of the discovery of the self. Destruction of 
the world that we have built and in which we live, and of ourselves within 
it; but then a wonderful reconstruction, of the bolder, cleaner, more 
spacious, and fully human life—that is the lure, the promise and terror, of 
these disturbing night visitants from the mythological realm that we carry 
within. (5)  
A disturbing vision Wolfe certainly depicts, a sympathetic torturer who from his youth 
knows little more than death and the destruction of the human body is chosen as the hero 
of this myth. Severian’s conciliation with entities a universe removed is frightening in its 
scope, with the drowning of the world the goal of this negotiation these beings cannot 
help but inspire fear and awe. In the security of logic one might hope to work through this 
feeling and arrive at a conclusion that firmly situates the fearsome “other” as an enemy, a 
cold and aloof manipulator drawing the puppet-strings of an already blemished hero 
towards an end that is wholly tragic. However, as Severian himself comes to realize, the 
navigation of these fiendishly captivating symbols is a journey that returns to the self. It 
is a destruction of the barriers that surround the self, a dismantling that is painful and 
terrifying, yet it ultimately leads to an individual understanding that is greater for the 
challenges it was forced to undergo.  
  Garvey  
 
32 
 Gene Wolfe’s The Book of the New Sun is a significant work that has seen little 
examination in the decades following its publication, yet the importance and 
effectiveness of what the text accomplishes is abundantly clear to the curious reader. 
Wolfe crafts a sophisticated mythology that takes the ancient symbols and archetypes of 
mankind and flings them far into the future, testing the endurance of these devices in a 
fantastic setting that calls into question the relevance of images first established in ages 
past. What is revealed is that these images have indeed endured, the twisting and complex 
narrative serving not to diminish what has been evoked but to enhance it, the unique and 
erudite diction Wolfe employs not obfuscating but validating. The Book of the New Sun is 
simply a beautiful and subtle work that stands boldly in its own literary corner. It 
incorporates motifs and themes of literature that has come before yet its approach is 
bravely uncommon. A lesser writer might have struggled with such a volatile creation, 
but Gene Wolfe performs with cool facility in the crafting of a narrative whose 
intelligence is willing to trust in the reader’s own.  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  Garvey  
 
33 
Appendix: Summary of The Book of the New Sun 
 
The Shadow of the Torturer begins the narrative of Severian, a man born and 
raised among the Order of Seekers for Truth and Penitence, a title that the vernacular of 
his day converts into the “guild of torturers.” His childhood is marked by portentous 
meetings and dream-like events that seem to have stepped outside of the boundaries of 
time, culminating in his brief romance with the Chatelaine Thecla, a woman imprisoned 
by the torturers at the behest of the Autarch, the supreme ruler of the Commonwealth. 
Unable to bear her agony Severian offers Thecla a swift suicide, and as a result he is 
exiled from his brotherhood, banished north to Thrax bearing the grand sword Terminus 
Est to serve as his judicial arm. Severian becomes involved in plots of intrigue, dramatic 
productions, and religious mystery while passing through the sweeping city of Nessus, 
and it is here that he unknowingly obtains the Claw of the Conciliator from the visiting 
order of Pelerines. While preparing to face a challenger in a duel at sunset, Severian 
raises a young woman named Dorcas from the murky depths of a funerary lake, and she 
cleaves to him with an ethereal desperation. Severian duels the challenger, the fighters 
dancing back and forth to avoid the poisoned razor-leaves of the avern plant they battle 
with, and Severian is mortally wounded, only to miraculously rise seemingly unharmed. 
Severian performs an execution shortly after and prepares to continue his journey with 
Dorcas, the two stopping to marvel at a vision of a burning cathedral hovering over 
Nessus, the “City Imperishable.” Severian and Dorcas reunite with characters previously 
lost, and the novel concludes with passage through the Piteous Gate. 
  Garvey  
 
34 
The Claw of the Conciliator finds Severian continuing his quest, separated from 
Dorcas and the group of actors who have journeyed with them. Severian is in the village 
of Saltus to perform several executions, accompanied by the half-mechanical man Jonas. 
A festival is underway in Saltus to coincide with the ceremonious executions, and here 
Severian encounters an old antagonist and a mysterious “green man”.  Severian sets the 
“green man” free from his chains, and he leaves the torturer with bewildering remarks 
about an Urth that enjoys the light of the New Sun. Severian performs the executions and 
is led astray by a letter that has been forged to disturb him, the letter leading him through 
an abandoned mine where the miraculous light of the Claw is displayed. The agents of 
the revolutionary Vodalus soon after apprehend Severian and Jonas, and a grotesque and 
symbolic corpse ritual is performed that unites the memories and essence of Thelca with 
Severian, the two becoming one. Severian and Jonas journey to the House Absolute, 
fleeing horrid entities from across the stars along the way, and resurrecting a patrolman 
suffocated by the interstellar darkness. Imprisoned within the high seat of governance, 
Thecla’s memories lead Severian to an escape that offers Jonas another way out, a 
pathway between reflecting mirrors that will return him to the wide seas of space. 
Roaming alone through the House Absolue Severian meets unique attendants and a 
familiar artist, eventually coming to the Autarch himself, this figure concealed by walls 
and doors crafted to trick the untrained eye. The Autarch shows Severian a vision, and 
reunites him with Dorcas and the troupe of theater performers. The play “Eschatology 
and Genesis” is performed verbatim for the court of royals and guests not from Urth, 
ending with panic and gunfire. Alone again, Severian and Dorcas conclude the second 
  Garvey  
 
35 
novel with a phantasmagoric event in a derelict stone town, communing with witches, a 
Badger, and the memories of an indigenous civilization.  
The Sword of the Lictor sees Severian already appointed and situated in Thrax, 
living with Dorcas as lictor and leman in this “City of Windowless Rooms.” Dorcas has 
become depressed and aware of forgotten memories, Severian distraught with uncertainty 
while he uses the Claw to aid a sickly boy and his sister, later attending a masquerade 
disguised only as himself. Severian again shows mercy to a woman he was to throw from 
a great height, forcing him to flee his post and the city. Briefly encountering a creature of 
fire Severian returns to Dorcas, who explains she will return south, while Severian will 
head into the mountains farther north. Cold and starving Severian braves the carved 
mountains that bear regal countenance, bringing him to the cabin of Casdoe and her son, 
a child also named Severian. An encounter with a beast that may speak as a daughter or a 
husband compels Severian to become the father of the boy of his namesake, and the two 
brave a steaming rainforest inhabited by hostile sorcerers with painted faces. Following 
this encounter and its trials, the two Severians brave the foreboding mountain range. 
They climb the tallest of the peaks shaped in the likeness of a ruler long dead, and 
reaching the golden ring at his hand little Severian is burnt and killed, leaving the 
childless father to huddle emaciated and weak next to a two-headed corpse. The corpse 
arises and is named Typhon, former emperor of Urth, who tempts Severian with wine and 
feast if he will swear fealty to him on the Claw. Severian overcomes temptation, descends 
the mountain and comes to a lakeside village. Here he is fed and respected, then drugged 
and imprisoned. Coming to understand these peoples fear, and passionately seeking the 
Claw that had been taken from him, Severian leads the lake people to the looming castle 
  Garvey  
 
36 
where a giant and his attendant reign. These two are none other than the playwrights with 
whom Severian is acquainted, and Severian finds not only they but three Hierodules 
descending from their craft that mounts the spires of the edifice. These beings speak with 
incredible foreknowledge of Severian’s future, compelling the giant to throw the Claw 
from the rain soaked parapets. Severian attacks the giant, leading to the destruction of 
Terminus Est and the sinking of the giant beneath the waters below, leaving Severian to 
frantically search for the relic of the Conciliator. It is found among broken blue shards, 
the remains of what was revealed to be only its luminous shell. Severian continues north 
with renewed resolve. 
The Citadel of the Autarch opens with an unarmed Severian traversing the borders 
of the raging war, coming across a dead soldier, the now bare Claw restoring life to him. 
Severian and his mute new companion stumble through the jungle together, coming down 
with fever and arriving at a lazaret of the sick and wounded, established by the Pelerines. 
Severian spends weeks in bed, wounded from his battle, sick and exhausted from his long 
journey and periods of starvation. While Severian is in the company of his bedmates, 
soldiers of the Commonwealth and a prisoner of the opposing Ascians, four stories are 
told to win the fancy of the woman soldier among them. Between the symbolic tales, the 
soldier Severian revived, now calling himself Miles, comes to speak with his savior and 
to announce his departure. Severian is certain this man is Jonas come again, returned 
from the stars wholly human once more. The stories told and Severian recovered, he at 
last restores the Claw to the altar the Pelerines have erected at the lazaret, euphoric at 
having accomplished this goal. Severian is asked by a Pelerine who watched him to 
journey to a known hermit whose home is within the fast closing jaws of the mouth of 
  Garvey  
 
37 
war, and following a map through an impossibly morphing terrain Severian finds Master 
Ash. Ash’s house is separated into stories that exist in different eras of time, eras Ash has 
been watching closely. Severian is forced to drag Ash unwilling from his home, yet soon 
after leaving the doorway the man and the house fade into nothing. Aimless Severian 
joins a militia he comes across, fighting a hellish battle and crippling his leg, which will 
never fully heal. Bloody and broken on the field Severian is rescued by the Autarch, who 
shares hidden knowledge. Severian swallows the elixir around the Autarch’s neck, and 
performs the hated corpse rite. Severian assumes the memories of this Autarch, and 
thereby all of the memories and personas of the Autarchs of history, a thousand men and 
women joining him and Thecla in a single body. Severian becomes the ruler of the 
Commonwealth, and after a few brief episodes in which he revisits his guild and his old 
friends, a revelation of his true parentage, and a furtive glance at Dorcas among the ruins 
of her past life, her true self now known, Severian “backs into the throne” to reign.  
The Urth of the New Sun occurs ten years after Severian’s retelling of his journey in 
becoming Autarch, and the Severian writing this novel aboard a massive spacecraft, adrift 
in a space straddling dimensions and time, may not be the same one as before. At the 
behest of spiritual visions preceding his Autarchy, of a three-legged dog from his youth 
and a deceased master torturer, Severian travels to Yesod where humanity through him 
will be judged worthy or unworthy of receiving a New Sun. If Severian fails, as previous 
Autarchs have, he will be castrated, and he will return to rule a Commonwealth with an 
uncertain future. Aboard the ship Severian is accompanied by the three Hierodules, 
people and other beings from across the galaxies, and a strange animal creature called 
Zak. Through the conflict and resolution revolving around assassination attempts on 
  Garvey  
 
38 
Severian, the subduing of rogue crew members, and a fall that seems to lead to Severian’s 
death, Zak continuously evolves until it is revealed that this creature was only a form 
chosen by the powerful Hierogrammate Tzadkiel. Eventually the ship reaches Yesod, 
where Tzadkiel assumes the position of judge in a resplendent and angelic figure. It is 
revealed that Tzadkiel and his kind want to see Severian succeed as much as he himself 
does, as the Hierogrammates are dependent on human biology to sustain their own lives 
and evolve. Severian is tried with vivified figures of characters he as met throughout The 
Book of the New Sun, some friends and some foes. Throughout Severian is attended by 
the Hierogrammate Apeta, who guides him through the alien world and offers him 
shelter. Their coupling produces the White Fountain, the galactic phenomenon by which 
the old sun will be rejuvenated. Severian is deemed worthy and he returns to Urth, but the 
Urth he returns to is one in a time centuries before Severian’s own. Here Severian lives 
the life of the Conciliator, drawing from the power of the White Fountain to establish the 
mythology he had only heard of through his miraculous deeds of resurrection and 
healing. Imprisoned by the living Typhon of this time, Severian escapes through the 
Corridors of Time with Tzadkiel’s aid, returning to his own time hours before the coming 
deluge and the era of the New Sun. The flood comes and with it destruction. Severian 
steps back through time once more to foster the primitive civilization of the stone town 
visited at the end of the second volume. Here he learns that after his fall on the ship is 
physical body indeed perished, and he has been living as an aquastor, a spirit like those 
that have visited him before, ever since. Severian moves forward in time again to the time 
of the New Sun after the flood, and finds a new mythology born of the 
anthropomorphized deities of himself and the survivors of the flood.
Works Cited 
 
Andre-Driussi, Michael. Lexicon Urthus: A Dictionary for the Urth Cycle. 2nd ed. 
Albany, CA: Sirius Fiction, 2008. Print. 
Campbell, Joseph. The Hero with a Thousand Faces. 3rd ed. Novato, CA: New World 
Library, 2008. Print. Bollingen Ser. XVII. 
Cansler, Ronald Lee. “Stranger in a Strange Land: Science Fiction As Literature of 
Creative Imagination, Social Criticism, and Entertainment.” Journal of Popular 
Culture 5.4 (Spring 1972): 944-954. Rpt. in Children's Literature Review. Ed. 
Rebecca Blanchard. Vol. 75. Gale, 2002. Literature Criticism Online. Web. 23 
Apr. 2016. 
Clute, John. “The Urth and All Its Glory.” Book World— The Washington Post (30 Jan. 
1983): 1-2. Rpt. in Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Jean C. Stine and 
Bridget Broderick. Vol. 25. Detroit: Gale, 1983. Literature Criticism Online. 
Web. 23 Apr. 2016. 
Collins, Bob. “Conclusion of the Book of the New Sun.” Fantasy Newsletter 5.11 (Dec. 
1982): 36. Rpt. in Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Jean C. Stine and Bridget 
Broderick. Vol. 25. Detroit: Gale, 1983. Literature Criticism Online. Web. 23 
Apr. 2016. 
Origen. “Threefold Interpretation.” The English Bible (King James Version): The Old 
Testament. Ed. Herbert Marks. Norton Critical ed. Vol. 1. New York: Norton, 
2012. 1859-861. Print. 
Sucharitkul, Somtow. “A Certain Slant of I.” Fantasy Newsletter 4.12 (Dec. 1981): 16-
17. Rpt. In Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Jean C. Stine and Bridget 
  Garvey  
 
40 
Broderick. Vol. 25. Detroit: Gale, 1983. Literature Criticism Online. Web. 23 
Apr. 2016. 
Wolfe, Gene. Shadow and Claw: The First Half of The Book of the New Sun: The 
Shadow of the Torturer & The Claw of the Conciliator. New York: ORB/Tom 
Doherty Associates, 1994. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. Sword & Citadel: The Second Half of The Book of the New Sun: The Sword 
of the Lictor & The Citadel of the Autarch. New York: ORB/Tom Doherty 
Associates, 1994. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. The Urth of the New Sun. New York: ORB/Tom Doherty Associates, 1987. 
Print. 
Wright, Peter. Attending Daedalus: Gene Wolfe, Artifice, and the Reader. Liverpool: 
Liverpool UP, 2003. Print. 
 