                                                                                                                                      
 225 
habits, elves were thought to bring humans bad dreams and to steal their children, leaving 
changelings in their place. 
It’s from that belief that oaf first appeared in English, in the seventeenth century. 
Originally an oaf was an elf’s child, one that had been left in a poor exchange for a stolen 
human one. In popular superstition, such children were assumed to be ugly or stupid. 
(Quinion) 
Of course, in this case, the mortal man is a boorish villain and the spiritual boy is pure, but the 
story’s title resonates with the actor Peter Palmer’s playing of an oaf in real life: “The 
Changeling” was actually about a changeling, and following the internal narrative logic led to 
external historical references which are objective in nature. Peter Palmer’s name in it extratextual 
sense is inextricably tied to the word oaf; the word oaf implies an elfin changeling. The literal 
narrative incorporation of the idea of the Immaculate Conception should have been enough to 
indicate that the mystery of the story actually involves the birth of Maria rather than some event 
which occurred after 1931. While there is not a compelling reason to speculate on the thematic 
implications of the inversion of good and bad in the story (though we are reminded of another 
famous “changeling” left for a human child in the care of a carpenter and his wife), the issue here 
involves the highly engineered precision of the workings of this story: we can know that Pete 
Palmer was born in 1931 – because Peter Palmer, the real-world actor, like Gene Wolfe, was 
born in 1931. We know that the changeling scenario is the proper reading, even though the 
narrator does not, because of the story’s connection to external facts which are obliquely and 
indirectly alluded to without actually being stated – the history of the word oaf, innately tied to 
the character Pete Palmer is most famous for playing, bears the connotation of an elfin 
changeling within it. Finally, we know that the transcendent, universal meaning of the Catholic 
                                                                                                                                      
 226 
concept of the Immaculate Conception, by its very definition, involves a mystery associated with 
Mary/Maria, not with Christ, and the fay child appeared when Maria was still a newborn. 
 No one had recognized these highly engineered underpinnings of the story. In Attending 
Daedalus, a book length study on Gene Wolfe, Peter Wright asserts that this story 
recontextualizes “the Peter Pan myth of the eternal child, [and…] demonstrates how memory can 
construct a therapeutic fantasy world into which psychologically scarred individuals can 
withdraw to find a kind of mental security … Palmer revives his past self and the world of his 
childhood to find an otherwise unattainable freedom” (30). Alas, the genre and the title of the 
story actually suggest a more fantastic plot: a changeling swap in which all of that psychological 
analysis fails to confront “what happened.” In its way, the consensus reading has almost no 
textual basis – it is a (reasonable) extrapolation based on the similarity between the names Pete 
Palmer and Peter Palimieri. 
When I presented my reading of “The Changeling” to Wolfe in 2012 via email, while he 
neither confirmed nor denied it, he did say a few things which might be of interest: 
There's a special mass tonight for Holy Thursday; I'm planning to go to that. Also a Good 
Friday service tomorrow. Then mass on Sunday, of course. After mass, Bobby and I will 
drive down to Teri's for Easter dinner. 
I've always liked Li'l Abner. Not Fearless Fosdick or any other such stuff, but the real 
thing: Abner, Mammy (Pansy Yokum), Pappy (Lucifer Yokum), Daisy Mae (Scragg), 
Moonbeam (McSwine), Stupifyin' Jones, Ol' Man Mose, Nightmare Alice, Hairless Joe, 
Lonesome Polecat, Eddie Ricketyback, Earthquake McGoon, and, well, on and on. The 
cast was huge, and always full of interest. (Wolfe, Personal Correspondence) 
 Even if the intent of the author has always supposedly been hidden behind a screen of 
                                                                                                                                      
 227 
inscrutable and impenetrable “textuality,” Wolfe’s Catholicism and his knowledge of Li’l Abner 
are both on display in this private message. This was all the confirmation I needed that I had 
reached the solution to his puzzle (after all, Li’l Abner appears nowhere by name in the story 
itself, yet Wolfe undoubtedly bears a childhood fondness for the character). Even without the 
external evidence, the application of the Catholic mystery operates strongly enough in Wolfe’s 
fiction to help draw conclusions – that is simply the modality Wolfe employs in constructing his 
stories, and, at least from his point of view, those sacraments and mysteries are not subjective in 
nature, but are instead codified and made objective by creed. Whether we believe they are 
transcendent truths or not, they are theologically and historically verifiable and definable. This, 
then, becomes the basis for understanding much of Wolfe’s fiction. Unlike Adam Roberts claim, 
quoted at the start of this dissertation, in which the symbols evident in Wolfe’s fiction lead to 
further confusion, the literal application of sacraments and creeds to the fiction of Gene Wolfe 
actually provides narrative closure: Roberts simply doesn’t recognize the meaning of the 
especially Catholic traditions Wolfe employs. 
 The entire thrust of this analysis is the assertion that Wolfe writes as an engineer: his 
mysteries are resolvable as long as the audience knows that the historical and religious 
significations function as objective signs. While the act of reading obviously involves the 
uncertainty of the linguistic enterprise, the manner in which Wolfe’s texts are constructed, based 
on externally verifiable “facts” outside of the linguistic system, even if they are rooted in 
convention, creates some interesting questions about the actual subjectivity (or possibility) of a 
mimetic model. This comes down to the process of composition: Wolfe creates palimpsests that 
truly are elaborate word problems based on logic, allusion, and pattern. 
I now return to some statements made by De Man and Derrida, with which I opened this 
                                                                                                                                      
 228 
dissertation. The model of reading presented in approaching Wolfe, with Catholic ideas and 
traditions given a concrete plot function as allusions which buttress and illuminate the suspicions 
aroused through a close reading, is not universal, but rather an individual process which 
acknowledges the rigorous process Wolfe undertakes in constructing his literary word problems. 
De Man states, “The replacement of a hermeneutic by a semiotic model, of interpretation by 
decoding, would represent, in view of the baffling historical instability of textual meanings 
(including, of course, those of canonical texts) a considerable progress. … The argument can be 
made, however, that no grammatical decoding, however refined, could claim to reach the 
determining figural dimensions of a text” (De Man 15). I do not think this is an accurate 
assessment of the rigorous logic of Wolfe’s texts; readers must at times go beyond grammar to 
historical and objective details that aid in the approximation of the transcendent signifier (in this 
case, established through a pre-existing creed). Would De Man identify this process as a 
rhetorical reading? By couching much of the solution in actualizing pre-existing standards of 
belief, the parameters at work in Wolfe’s stories have objective components. De Man also says: 
Technically correct rhetorical readings may be boring, monotonous, predictable and 
unpleasant, but they are irrefutable. They are also totalizing (and potentially totalitarian) 
for since the structures and functions they expose do not lead to the knowledge of an 
entity (such as language) but are an unreliable process of knowledge production that 
prevents all entities, including linguistic entities, from coming into discourse as such, 
they are indeed universals, consistently defective models of language’s impossibility to 
be a model language. (15)  
For many readers constantly baffled by Wolfe’s stories, his fiction actually reinforces these ideas 
about the impossible nature of language. One of his most enigmatic novellas, “Seven American 
                                                                                                                                      
 229 
Nights,” features several narrative destabilizers, including the possibility of the narrator ingesting 
hallucinogenic drugs, a machine which can write in the style of any sample fed to it, and his 
conceivably altered journal, recovered after he has disappeared. Peter Wright describes this work 
as follows: 
In ‘Seven American Nights’, which chronicles the adventures of a young Iranian tourist, 
Nadan Jaffarzadeh, in a post-catastrophic USA, Wolfe’s appeal to the reader’s ‘capacity 
for ironic judgement’ is explicit. On his arrival in the USA Jaffarzadeh buys what he 
believes to be a hallucinogenic drug in which he soaks one of six candy eggs, resolving to 
eat one sweet on each of the remaining nights of his stay. Recorded as a first-person 
narrative, the story abounds with uncertainties as the reader, like Jaffarzadeh, is unsure 
when, or if, the drug is effective. As a consequence, the veracity of all Jaffarzadeh’s 
experiences after he ingests the first egg becomes suspect. Which of his many strange 
encounters are hallucinations? … These questions cannot be answered as the authenticity 
of the events recounted in Jaffarzadeh’s notebook remain in doubt.  ... By emphasizing 
early in the narrative that the mysteries of the story cannot be resolved, Wolfe indicates 
that the text is an insoluble self-referential puzzle about the conundrum of perception 
rather than an enigma for the reader to solve by detection. (Wright, Attending Daedalus 
38-9) 
I cannot resist the sublime pleasure of stating, one final time, that Wright is wrong. The events of 
the novella occur during Holy Week, before Easter, and much like Christ, the narrator will face a 
similar trial on Thursday off-screen: the strange steps the narrator hears outside his door at the 
end of his Thursday entry are readily understandable to someone who realizes the allegorical 
situation: Jaffarzadeh has been arrested and will be executed on Friday, when the writing 
                                                                                                                                      
 230 
machine finishes his journal. External validation of this comes from a surprising source: every 
Persian character save one in the novella is named after characters in another obscure book by 
James Morier published in 1823, The Adventures of Haji Baba of Ispahan. In that book, Nadan is 
a secondary and insignificant character whose dialogue includes one very specific line which 
confirms our suspicions – he boasts that from Friday to Friday, no drink or unclean substance 
shall touch his lips. In Wolfe’s “Seven American Nights,” Nadan refuses a drink on an early day, 
citing religious reasons; however, on the final day, the narrator drinks without qualm or refusal. 
The seven nights of the title span Friday to Friday. Readers need not be confused by the 
possibility that Nadan may have ingested a hallucinogenic drug on any given day: his namesake 
in The Adventures of Haji Baba of Ispahan actually boasts that nothing of the sort shall touch his 
lips. Far from an insoluble puzzle, two simple allusions straighten out all of the confusion: 
Nadan is arrested and put to death by the American government, reliving the events of Holy 
Week, and the final Friday entry is a fabrication, in which he drinks alcohol and violates the 
boast of the character from whom Wolfe took his name, cluing us in to that entry’s artificiality.17 
In Morier’s novel, the character Nadan boasts as follows:  
‘In that,’ said the mollah, ‘esteem yourself as the most fortunate of men; for I am looked 
up to as the pattern of the followers of the blessed Mahomed. In short, I may be called a 
living Koran. None pray more regularly than I. No one goes to the bath more 
scrupulously, nor abstains more rigidly from everything that is counted unclean. You will 
find neither silk in my dress, nor gold on my fingers. My ablutions are esteemed the most 
complete of any man’s in the capital, and the mode of my abstension the most in use. I 
                                                      
17 Earlier in the text, Nadan returns home to find his desk ransacked and one of the eggs missing: 
police dogs have removed the “hallucinogen,” which was probably poisoned regardless, though 
we do not have the time or space to indulge in all of these complex details. 
                                                                                                                                      
 231 
neither smoke nor drink wine before men; neither do I play at chess, at gengifeh (cards), 
or any game which, as the law ordains, abstracts the mind from holy meditation. I am 
esteemed the model of fasters; and during the Ramazan give no quarter to the many 
hungry fellows who come to me under various pretexts, to beg a remission of the 
strictness of the law. “No,” do say to them, “die rather than eat, or drink, or smoke. Do 
like me, who, rather than abate one tittle of the sacred ordinance, would manage to exist 
from Jumah to Jumah (Friday) without polluting my lips with unlawful food."’ 
The story of “Seven American Nights” happens to span from Jumah to Jumah, and every 
character with a Persian or Arabic name save Gholam Gassem in Wolfe’s novella might be 
found in Morier’s novel as well. In addition, an understanding of the religious scruples (even if 
they do become at times hypocritical) which govern Nadan’s use of alcohol and his adamant 
refusal earlier in the novella serves as a fairly large beacon that something is not quite right on 
the final day of his journal when he suggests an alcoholic drink carelessly: religion is important 
in Wolfe’s stories. Paying attention to religious creeds and scruples can be useful in cutting 
through the other barriers to comprehension. 
Given that a thorough understanding of Wolfe’s texts on a surface level (even to answer 
“what happened”) demands a historical and theological connection, his engineered order creates 
scenarios which are seemingly incomprehensible when they are removed from their objective 
structures. When Derrida considers that “reading should free itself, at least in its axis, from the 
classical categories of history—not only from the categories of the history of ideas and the 
history of literature but also, and perhaps above all, from the categories of the history of 
philosophy,” perhaps too much of what is accepted as objective would be lost to contextualize a 
Wolfe story, leaving language a closed system where its subjective and slippery nature is far 
                                                                                                                                      
 232 
more obvious (Derrida 3). It might be worth relating Wolfe and his use of transcendent, universal 
signs established by creed and historical or literary events to Derrida’s theories on signs and the 
Logos:  
As modem structural thought has clearly realized, language is a system of signs and 
linguistics is part and parcel of the science of signs, or semiotics (Saussure’s sémiologie). 
The mediaeval definition of sign—“aliquid stat pro aliquo”—has been resurrected and 
put forward as still valid and productive. Thus the constitutive mark of any sign in 
general and of any linguistic sign in particular is its twofold character: every linguistic 
unit is bipartite and involves both aspects —one sensible and the other intelligible… 
But to these metaphysico-theological roots many other hidden sediments cling. The 
semiological or, more specifically, linguistic “science” cannot therefore hold on to the 
difference between signifier and signified—the very idea of the sign—without the 
difference between sensible and intelligible; certainly, but also not without retaining, 
more profoundly and more implicitly, and by the same token the reference to a signified 
able to “take place” in its intelligibility, before its “fall,” before any expulsion into the 
exteriority of the sensible here below. As the face of pure intelligibility, it refers to an 
absolute logos to which it is immediately united. This absolute logos was an infinite 
creative subjectivity in medieval theology: the intelligible face of the sign remains turned 
toward the word and the face of God. 
Of course, it is not a question of “rejecting” these notions; they are necessary and, at least 
at present, nothing is conceivable for us without them. It is a question at first of 
demonstrating the systematic and historical solidarity of the concepts and gestures of 
thought that one often believes can be innocently separated. The sign and divinity have 
                                                                                                                                      
 233 
the same place and time of birth. The age of the sign is essentially theological. Perhaps it 
will never end. Its historical closure is, however, outlined.  
Even when the thing, the “referent,” is not immediately related to the logos of a creator 
God where it began by being the spoken/thought sense, the signified has at any rate an 
immediate relationship with the logos in general (finite or infinite), and a mediated one 
with the signifier, that is to say with the exteriority of writing (Derrida 14-15). 
That wonderful interplay between writing and representation, sign and signified, and interior and 
exterior might very well be bricolage, but from the point of view of an engineer, if external 
events are reproducible in any way, they approach a kind of truth. It could very well be that the 
close reading I have found so effective in making Wolfe’s texts “sensible” and “intelligible,” 
assuming all along that the intentions of the creator where actually determinable, might be but a 
coincidental trick of language’s ability to convince us that it refers to anything at all as an 
adequate model. That understanding might also be a delusion that Gene Wolfe and I share – 
enough to convince us that one man’s random and haphazard bricolage is another man’s precise 
and ordered engineering. 
 The final text this chapter will employ to illustrate how profoundly Wolfe’s fiction is 
connected to an existing tradition is from much later in his writing career. The Sorcerer’s House 
was published in 2010 and remains one of his more popular late works. Certainly, Wolfe has 
produced a lot of dense masterpieces. His later fiction can be just as complex as the earlier work 
which skyrocketed him to, if not fame, a reputation as one of the genre’s most accomplished 
literary artists. The Sorcerer’s House directly teases that definitive conclusions about “what 
really happened” might never be reached. In this novel, an educated con man struggling to make 
ends meet after his incarceration contacts his twin brother in a series of letters that serve to flatter 
                                                                                                                                      
 234 
his brother’s wife just as much as they hope to attract his twin’s attention. He claims to inherit a 
sprawling and sinister house as well as a strip of land that will guarantee him a fortune; sorcery, 
multiple twins of different temperaments, shape-changing foxes, werewolves, a professional 
psychic, real estate agents, and his mother from fairyland all people a fast-paced plot that finally 
puts Baxter Dunn and his brother George face to face (maybe). The final “compiler’s note” ends 
with the claim that “Baxter Dunn was unquestionably a most imaginative and picturesque liar, 
but all that he tells us cannot be false. … How much is true? How much fabrication? Perhaps we 
shall never know” (Wolfe, Sorcerer’s House 300). 
An ending like that actually does cast doubt on whether readers can ever meaningfully 
discern the “real” events from the fabricated or exaggerated ones depicted in the epistolary web 
of the novel. Luckily, we have at least one powerful metaphor to help contextualize the structure 
of Bax’s story. In the novel, the “magic” performed by Bax and some other characters seems to 
involve a device with three rings. While the strange symbol of the three-ringed triannulus serves 
to indicate how the magic in the novel works, it also seems to be, in its own way, yet another 
metaphor for the novel as a whole. Everything found on the inner ring is on each of the external 
rings, but there are extra figures that appear on each successive layer, such that some images on 
the second ring are not found on the first, while images graven into the external third are not 
present on the two more central rings. The psychic consultant who advises first George’s wife 
and then Bax might actually provide some very cogent advice on how to read the novel: 
So I talked all this over with Madame Orizia. She is my psychic adviser. I said, “Do you 
think George will hurt his poor brother?” She tried the cards and looked terribly 
frightened. After that, the little crystal. That is the real one, as she told me two years ago. 
                                                                                                                                      
 235 
There is a big one, too. It is plastic but it looks like crystal and it tells everybody what 
they want to hear. She uses that one all the time. 
But the little one is real. She said she saw great danger for George and his brother (you) 
too. BE CAREFUL. (114) 
This suggests how to proceed in reading the novel: the “smaller” ring introduces truths from 
Bax’s real life, which are then embellished - at first, we might assume that these are according to 
Baxter’s increasingly large ambitions. Looking at the shorter letters written back and forth to 
Shell, Madame Orizia, and Doris initially supports the impression that Baxter is attempting to 
con his brother in many of his letters. In particular, the brief and quick notes to Sheldon Hawes, 
his cellmate, contain only a fraction of the details included in Bax’s other missives, and are 
especially telling in their failure to mention Bax’s supposed benefactor, Zwart Black, as well as 
the second set of twins, Zwart’s sons Ieuan and Emlyn, whom he encounters inside the Black 
House. 
These letters also reveal the triple structure of the novel. At one point, Bax finds three 
coins, and pawns one of them at face value in order to try to get enough to make more money 
later: “I will sell one of the larger coins. It should bring a considerable sum, and with that I can 
redeem the smallest” (77). This act could even reflect Baxter’s aim: he might be attempting to 
“sell” the larger stories in the hope of material gain to redeem his actual meager existence – 
which is a coin sold at “face value” – the truth. However, this does not mean that the genre of the 
novel is a strict realistic con game, as there are just enough hints of a different type of 
supernatural menace in the short letters to Shell and in the missives from Madame Orizia and 
Doris, and sufficient threat throughout the novel to suggest that Bax might lose mastery of his 
plans, as he does not entirely control the parameters of the real and unreal. In one of Wolfe’s 
                                                                                                                                      
 236 
greatest reversals, the very structure of The Sorcerer’s House hints that house spirits are actually 
conning the con man. 
It is worth expanding on the triple nature of Bax’s story. At one point, he borrows a 
wheelbarrow from his neighbor to transport a recliner left on the curb to his new estate. As Bax 
sits in the chair, he notes, “I found fifty-five cents in the crack between the seat and the back. … 
fifty-five cents is a significant sum to me just now” (40). Perhaps the easiest way to make fifty-
five cents is with two quarters and a nickel – three coins, but one of them different in kind, and 
smaller. Soon, he finds three gold coins inside a desk in the attic, of Greek design, and these are 
the coins which he intends to pawn, mentioned above. His areas of specialty and interest are the 
classical world of antiquity and nineteenth century literature. After this, Bax finds a mattress in 
the attic: “Assisted only by [the fox] Winkle, I was – barely – able to drag the mattress down the 
spiral stair I have described and into this room. I am seated on it now, and sit proudly” (77). Of 
course, he discovers ridiculous amounts of money in this mattress, just as he found money in the 
chair and the desk, each find increasingly unbelievable and unlikely. This triple pattern, three in 
one, might also shed light on the organization of the novel as a whole, and as these patterns 
develop, the “two to one” motif becomes more prevalent, whether it be three types of fish in the 
Lakeshore Hat Trick or three guests at Alexander Skotos’s funeral. 
Triplication allows other permutations on themes, motifs, or legends within the novel. 
When Bax first goes out to eat with the interested real-estate agent Doris Rose Griffin, he hears a 
story from her about Mr. Black’s old butler, who was known for stealing clothes-lines (106). Her 
story soon presents the potential immortality of the butler and even evolves into a suggestion that 
he serves the head of John the Baptist on a platter, though the disparate parts of the butler’s tale 
seem to be cobbled together from multiple urban legends. In the next letter, a hobo shows up 
                                                                                                                                      
 237 
squatting in Bax’s house, and soon returns claiming to be the legendary butler. Still later, the 
“butler” Nick casts aside this identity and, almost on que, a more vampiric iteration of the butler 
emerges from the locked trunk of the car in Baxter’s garage. In this case, we can see how there 
might be three “uses” of Doris’s story and the hobo: after his introduction as a story, the tale of 
the butler becomes real, and he begins to serve Bax. Soon, when that figure’s role in the story 
changes, the butler is re-introduced in the form of a different character, with different details and 
features, and the first butler becomes Zwart Black, incognito, the man who supposedly left his 
house to Baxter Dunn. If we are to (mistakenly) assume that Bax is constructing different 
versions of his tale, such as a tame exaggeration of romantic conquests to entertain his old cell 
mate and a more fantastic one to attract George and Millie, then there are three iterations of the 
butler: as a story, as a living man who serves Bax, and as a vampire or zombie liberated from the 
trunk. Though this final figure seems to be a threatening one, Nicholas still calls Bax on the 
phone with the same verbal habits and subservient attitude as Bax’s previous butler, in an act 
which has no previous precedent in the text; it is definitely worth noting that Orizia identifies 
him as the source of Bax’s problems once he is sealed back in the trunk. 
If Madame Orizia’s statement about her larger con crystals is to be believed, then the 
inner ring of the triannulus is synonymous with the small crystal: “That is the real one.” The 
large, convoluted web of fabrications resonates with the crystal that just “tells everybody what 
they want to hear.” Unfortunately, Wolfe makes life hard for everyone by corroborating some 
(but not all) of the supernatural seeming events in short letters from Doris and Madame Orizia – 
including mention of the malevolent dwarf Quorn, the wolves which Baxter claims to have 
fought in his longer letters, and a strange woman he and Doris meet on the road named Kiki. 
After some reflection, it seems that Bax himself describes exactly what Sheldon, who might 
                                                                                                                                      
 238 
represent the middle ring of the con game, would want: “You have been waiting for the sex, if I 
know you. The problem is telling you so that you will believe it” (156). For the purposes of this 
analysis, it might be most fruitful to consider Doris’s very brief letters as the innermost ring, 
though this, too, presents some challenges. Her mention of Kiki and the werewolves in the 
postscripts to her notes brings us to the possibility of forgery: one of Bax’s friends in prison was 
a forger, and it seems that at least one of the letters must be forged (though it is most likely Letter 
44, written from “George” to Millie). Can we trust even the shortest letters in the text, those from 
Doris, without considering that her postscripts might be forged? The strange spectral hitchhiker 
Kiki and the werewolves are mentioned in Doris’s short letters, while no mention of the twin 
brothers Ieuan and Emlyn or their father Zwart Black make it into Bax’s letters to Sheldon 
Hawes at all, precluding them from the central ring of “truth.” However, it seems that an even 
more sinister myth lurks in the darkness of the trunk for Bax, one associated with strange eyes 
and a strong stench that thrives off the blood of children, originating in ancient Greece. 
Wolfe’s late fiction often does two different things at once, and some of the subtext 
actually seems to be intended as metatextual or symbolic illustrations for the reader to begin to 
piece together the background story. In the case of The Sorcerer’s House, perhaps Madame 
Orizia’s and Bax’s contradictions, suggestions, and hints might point to the inconsistencies in the 
more fantastic version of the story. In Tim Powers introduction to the PS Publishing edition of 
the novel, he asserts: 
The Sorcerer’s House is alive with mythology, but the ideal reader would be one who 
knows nothing of mythology. After all, the reason mythology still enchants us is that the 
oldest circuitry in our brains recognizes its eerily consistent images and figures and 
quandaries as transcendentally real, not because we consider it anthropologically 
                                                                                                                                      
 239 
educational. The subconscious is a keyboard, and the keys don’t have to be named if the 
hearers recognize the notes. (Powers vii) 
While this is a fascinating statement that almost jives with the famous quote regarding the 
unconscious operation of symbols present at the start of The Book of the New Sun, Wolfe is a 
conscious artist, and to be separated from mythology is to lose some very important knowledge. 
Why be left with uncertainty when we can actually know? The Sorcerer’s House alludes to many 
myths, and they are deeply entrenched in untangling the reality behind Bax’s experiences. 
Since Quorn and Kiki appear in the short letters, it is worthwhile considering their greater 
implications. As readers concentrate on only the brief letters, it first appears as though a non-
supernatural explanation works to explain most things. However, details in the accounts from 
Madame Orizia and Doris challenge this reading. Wolfe has been known to rely on external 
allusions to thematically ground some of the patterns in his work, and in this case, the most 
obvious loose thread involves the cryptic warnings of Kiki, who mentions that there is something 
waiting in the dark for Bax and also suggests that, at least for her, home is never far. Her name 
bears a close resemblance to a house spirit known as the Kikimora. This is only the first “dirty” 
trick of allusion Wolfe pulls in this particular text. 
In its most benevolent manifestation, the Kikimora is a kitchen spirit. In many European 
folk traditions, however, the Kikimora serves as the bearer of bad news. According to Natalia 
Klimczak: 
The meaning of her name may come from the Finnish language, where “kikke mörkö” 
means scarecrow. No matter what the roots of the word are, it is used for a being without 
a body, a nightmare, or a scary spirit which disturbs people at night. Kikimora is a 
                                                                                                                                      
 240 
creature which settles in a house and doesn't want to leave - making the lives of people 
who live there unbearable. 
Her origins are somewhat confused, but the Kikimora was often grown from a dead fetus 
or stillborn child, or, in some traditions, even proceeding from the body of a woman who 
died during childbirth. Besides serving as a messenger of bad news, the Kikimora legends 
involve several specific details that are worth thinking about. She could appear as a 
young woman who would visit men in their dreams sexually to drain their energy, and 
also torment the real women involved with the men to make them jealous and suspicious. 
The Kikimora could also travel through keyholes and, if a Kikimora was suspected to be 
present, children were advised to avoid looking at doors, chests, and wardrobes, where 
the spirits like to hide. One manner of fighting the illusions and charms of the Kikimora 
was by looking out of windows.  
The windows in Bax’s house are given a special significance that is never fully explained within 
the text. One of the twins, Ieuan, is insistent upon breaking the windows, and a clear explanation 
is never given. A midnight visitor with a cold handshake puts out the “longlight” candle which 
accompanies the triannulus, an ominous development which terrifies the other twin, Emlyn. Bax 
is even visited by a werefox vixen in the night for sexual purposes. However, not all of the 
imagery associated with the Kikimora is negative, as the protective spirit could also appear as a 
deceased member of the family. 
The Russian version of the Kikimora’s tale resonates even more strongly with the events 
in The Sorcerer’s House. She can dwell in the cellar or in the stove and makes sounds like those 
of mice. There are two distinct types of Kikimoras: one comes from the forest and is married to a 
creature known as a Domovoi (which means “He from the house.”) The Domovoi are small, 
                                                                                                                                      
 241 
bearded, and hairy, and they can also appear as the current house owner, or a male ancestor, 
sometimes with horns. They can also appear as cats or dogs. The Domovoi is the house guardian, 
and if he is happy, his nature is benevolent. However, if he becomes displeased due to disrespect, 
slovenliness, or abuse, he becomes more like a poltergeist and will even physically assault the 
owners. Most importantly for the purpose of analyzing Wolfe’s novel, the Domovoi can serve as 
an oracle. His singing, joking, and dancing will predict a good future, but several warning signs 
foretell impending misfortune or a death in the family (usually for the head of the household). 
These include night wailing, the extinguishing of a candle, and the visible manifestation of the 
Domovoi. If his hands feel warm, good fortune is coming; a cold touch presages misfortune and 
doom. He also dwells beneath the threshold, at the center of the house, or under the stove. 
Additionally, he has a tendency to steal tools which are left out (Ivanits). 
The resonance with the plot of The Sorcerer’s House does not stop here, because the 
other type of Kikimora, originating from the swamp, is married to a strange and malevolent 
being known as Leshy, a shapeshifting forest creature who can also change size. He leads 
travelers astray and abducts children, but he is also accompanied by a coterie of wolves and 
bears. He shares features with another demon of Slavic mythology known as Chort, whose name 
means “the black one” (Bane). Readers who have recently completed Wolfe’s novel would 
notice several resonances with the plot, including the forest creatures, the blowing out of a 
candle bringing bad luck, and even the importance of a handshake; the Kikimora serves as an 
excellent bridge between the “fantastic” longer letters sent to Millie and George and the short 
letters between Shell, Doris, and Madame Orizia; its associations can finally begin to 
contextualize the supernatural events surrounding Bax, though he does not realize their 
implications himself. 
                                                                                                                                      
 242 
Unfortunately, the triple structure of the novel demands that readers look for more than 
one type of spirit, and there are some details in the novel, delineated below, which suggest that 
perhaps the Kikimora is not truly the “inner ring” of spirits, especially considering the horned 
image on the triannulus. Given that two of the characters in the text have the names Nick and 
Nicholas, and even seem to appear in a letter from Shell to Bax “checking up” on our primary 
narrator and his friends, under the guise of “the Greek” and a “long skinny torpedo,” legends 
surrounding Saint Nicholas, especially those of the more sinister Knecht Ruprecht, might also 
make sense of some of the imagery in the text. Saint Nicholas even has a companion named 
Zwarte Piet, also loosely associated with the demonic. Zwart Black, it should be noted, was the 
name of the man who supposedly left Bax his strange house. 
However, even considering the mythical echoes of Knecht Ruprecht and the Kikimora, 
the primary threat of the text, at least as identified by Madame Orizia, does not seem to come 
into much greater clarity. Instead, readers are left with scant information to determine the 
identity of the rattling “thing” inside the trunk she identifies as the center of Bax’s troubles. 
Additionally, some of the background details make little sense at first. Characters such as 
Goldwurm and Ambrosius, sorcerers from Faerie, are equally unexplained, though they are 
mentioned several times by Emlyn. Given the emphasis on “the Greek” and his companion, there 
are just enough hints to suggest that the drinker of children’s blood with its terrible, terrible eyes 
(linking it to the lycanthrope Lupine, the most obvious antagonist of the text), with its unsettling 
and unusual hands (which directly threaten strangulation in Shell’s letter, connecting it in the text 
to Goldwurm, who supposedly strangled Ambrosius) might actually be at the center of Bax’s 
problems. A worm, after all, might be described as a long, skinny torpedo. One legend which 
might explain both Goldwurm and the mysterious Nicholas happens to be Greek in origin, and 
                                                                                                                                      
 243 
the most infamous drinker of the blood of children (who happens to have eyes with very unusual 
properties and is also usually associated with a very strong and terrible stench) in Greek myth is 
the Lamia of Corinth, especially as related in Philostratus’s Life of Apollonius. There are many 
reasons to suspect that the Lamia, a shapeshifter not always relegated to the form of a serpent, 
might represent the true threat to Bax’s safety, but there is one more important detail which 
readers should consider. Bax’s magical werefox companion, Inari Winkle, might be more sinister 
than she appears. 
In F. Hadland Davis’s Myths and Legends of Japan, the fox God Inari is certainly 
presented in a complex light: 
Inari was originally the God of Rice, but in the eleventh century he became associated 
with the Fox God, with attributes for good and evil, mostly for evil, so profuse and so 
manifold in their application that they cause no little confusion to the English reader. All 
foxes possess supernatural powers to an almost limitless degree. They have the power of 
infinite vision; they can hear everything and understand the secret thoughts of mankind 
generally, and in addition they possess the power of transformation and of transmutation. 
The chief attribute of the bad fox is the power to delude human beings, and for this 
purpose it will take the form of a beautiful woman, and many are the legends told in this 
connection. If the shadow of a fox-woman chances to fall upon water, only the fox, and 
not the fair woman, is revealed. It is said that if a dog sees a fox-woman the feminine 
form vanishes immediately, and the fox alone remains. (95) 
Given the habits of the malicious Kikimora to deceive and beguile men, the features of the fox 
mentioned above are also manifested in Bax’s letters, including the prominent presence of a dog 
and water. Without looking into these myths, some of the novel’s features, such as the 
                                                                                                                                      
 244 
description of Nicholas as a “torpedo,” the ambiguously gendered figure on the Corinthian coin 
Bax finds, and the relationship of Goldwurm and Ambrosius to the surface story would be 
forever unclear. 
The identities and features of Nicholas, Lupine, and Goldwurm all conform to the 
legends surrounding the Lamia of Corinth, a unified mythos describing a sinister and completely 
devious figure. At one point in the text, the younger set of twins who appear in the Black House 
but are never seen outside of it engage in some personal conversation with Bax. Ultimately, the 
surface plot indicates that they are his younger siblings, while the real-estate agent who initially 
oversaw the property and handed it over to Bax, Martha Murrey, eventually becomes the mother 
of both sets of twins. When one of the twins, Ieuan, comes to warn Bax of Lupine, Bax refuses to 
shake his hand. His brother Emlyn seems to become infatuated with the man-eating Lupine, and 
by the end of the story he is clearly under her sway. Though Ieuan might not be “real” outside of 
Bax’s mind, his warning is topical. The Lamia of Corinth has one power in myth which solidifies 
her as the primary threat of the text, though her name is never directly mentioned. In addition to 
changing shape, having an ambiguous gender (Lamia’s testicles, according to Aristophanes, are 
the most noxious objects in existence), drinking the blood of humans (particularly children), 
having a strong stench, and possessing terrible eyes which can possess others, she has the ability 
to create a mansion, servants and all, to accomplish her seductions and drain the life from her 
victims. When Apollonius of Tyana saw through her illusion, it vanished (Ogden). Wolfe has 
envisioned a different end here, given the close relationship between the names Apollonius and 
Ambrosius. In his novel, the master sorcerer Ambrosius was strangled offstage by Goldwurm, a 
name which invokes the word often used to describe dragons and serpents of myth: wyrm. The 
gold in the name also links it to the golden Corinthian coin, which has a woman on one side and 
                                                                                                                                      
 245 
a figure of ambiguous gender on the other. In addition, the gold tipped staff of power which 
Zwart Black appears to wield at the climax of the novel is a clear symbolic link to the 
domination of the Lamia over the perceptions of everyone in that scene, through the structures 
and resonances established by Wolfe’s repetitions. 
 When Bax picks up a hitchhiker name Kiki in the central chapter of the book, knowledge 
of the kikimora myth also help to contextualize much of that particular encounter and of events 
which previously seemed to be merely features of the surface plot. Her patterns of speech 
reinforce the structure of the novel: “Rode in a car twice. … Twice in a car’s all I’ve ever rode. 
Uncanny thing, though ain’t it? Ain’t it a uncanny thing?” (Wolfe, The Sorcerer’s House 182) 
Two off screen cart rides and one car ride in the text’s present mirrors the pattern of three 
employed throughout the novel. She also keeps repeating that her house is always near, as it 
would be if it was a manifestation of another hostile spirit in the form of Lupine/Nicholas/the 
Lamia of Corinth. Kiki warns Bax that something is waiting in the dark behind them in the car – 
later, readers discover that Nicholas the vampiric butler has been hiding inside “his” trunk, 
stowed in the back of the car. 
Ultimately, Wolfe saturates the text with intertextual mythological references so 
thoroughly that even seemingly innocuous descriptions help identify characters. He comes into 
the Black House through Martha Murrey. She invites him to her own house and prepares food 
for him. During her meal preparation, she claims that when she returned from a long trip, she 
was left as nothing but a scarecrow. Normally, this would be an innocuous description. However, 
given that the name kikimora means “scarecrow,” describing a house spirit of the kitchen, this 
innocuous statement implicates her in the web of spirits seeking to snare Bax. Those who know 
the myth of the kikimora become privy to the supernatural agencies at work in the text and the 
                                                                                                                                      
 246 
manner in which Bax is deceived into believing that the house, his supposed inheritance, is 
“real.” 
Without the very clear triple pattern suggested by the triannulus, of two exaggerated or 
artificial occurrences and one natural one, there would be very little room to assert anything with 
confidence in this novel. The text encourages careful readers to begin collapsing identities into 
one another, given how Alexander Skotos, Zwart Black, and Nick (the first butler, before 
Nicholas emerges from his trunk), despite contrary stories and inconsistent details, all merge into 
one figure. To believe that Nick is Zwart Black, after all, requires readers to assume that he is 
lying about being a creature made by Black. Similarly, to believe that Alexander Skotos is Zwart 
Black requires readers to ignore that Skotos’ friend Hardaway does not recognize Black at the 
funeral. 
 It is worth reiterating one final time how the novel has been structured around the stories 
of the Lamia. Nicholas exists in old newspapers reports set forty years before the novel begins as 
a threat to children, stealing clothes and drinking their blood. When the trunk is opened, 
everyone comments on the stench. When Lupine appears, she is also associated with a strong 
smell. One common trope of the Lamia in myth involves the stench that allows her detection. 
The Lamia was long used as a story to frighten the young, and her backstory is profoundly 
related to children: her own children, born of Zeus, were destroyed by a jealous Hera. In some 
versions of the myth, she tore her own eyes out in madness, and Zeus gave her a new pair, 
transforming her into a monster who could exact revenge by consuming the children of others, in 
some stories drinking their blood. Of course, these are the traits which most exemplify Nicholas: 
terrifying eyes, along with the strange stench surrounding the butler and Lupine herself. In later 
stories of the Lamia, such as the one told by Philostratus in his biography of Apollonius, a first 
                                                                                                                                      
 247 
century wonder worker, a ghost has assumed the guise of a woman to seduce one of his students. 
Apollonius warns his pupil that he is warming a snake at his bosom. This creature admits to 
fattening up her young male victims for food, interested in their fresh blood. Finally, and most 
tellingly for the novel, this apparition, the Lamia of Corinth, has the ability to summon an entire 
mansion, servants and all. Only when Apollonius reveals her false identity is the illusion 
dispelled (Ogden). This also explains the disappearance of Bax in the “Compiler’s Note” at the 
end of the novel: he, too, will fall victim to the Lamia’s machinations, though her name is never 
mentioned in the text itself. The house he has been living in is nothing but the illusion of the 
Lamia, and the servants merely extensions of her own plan. 
Hopefully readers will be able to see how intimately the story of the Lamia resonates 
with the trouble Bax faces in The Sorcerer’s House. Goldwurm and Ambrosius are most easily 
understood in thinking of them as the Lamia and Apollonius; the golden Corinthian coin 
allegorizes the Lamia and creates a connection to the image of gold, which influences George so 
strongly when he chases Nicholas into the Black House. The description of Nick, with his odd 
hands, as a “long skinny torpedo” might be considered serpentine in nature. In some myths of the 
Lamia, she has monstrous hands as well. Additionally, she is not always a serpent and can 
change into other forms. 
The allegorical possibilities in the text should perhaps also be considered in closing. The 
name Ambrosius means “immortal” or “divine,” originating from a Greek adjective. Bax’s 
thwarted love interest, Doris, has a name which means “gift,” just as her husband Theodore has a 
name which means “gift of God.” While some readings of the book assert that Doris is a danger 
to Bax, the modus operandi of a jealous Kikimora to make true lovers doubt each other seems to 
explain the suspicion cast on her and her own flight from Bax, which she repents of too late. It 
                                                                                                                                      
 248 
seems that the spirit of Ted Griffin actually does act to facilitate the relationship of Bax and 
Doris Rose, and to protect Bax when he can as a being far less powerful than the others at work 
in the text. Ieuan has a name which also means “God is gracious” or gift – Bax has the chance to 
interact with three gifts in the form of Ieuan, Ted, and Doris, and his final rejection of Dorris’ 
ring and his acceptance of the sword at the end of the novel suggests that he has chosen a 
weapon over love, throwing away all of them when he destroys his brother and takes his place, 
embracing the illusions and empty promises of the Lamia, dooming himself. 
In each of the texts discussed in this chapter, knowledge outside of the text serves as 
confirmation of suspicions which arise from the structure of the texts themselves. The next 
chapter will deal more thoroughly with the complicated design elements discernible in Wolfe’s 
fiction and present at its conclusion a cogent reading strategy which suggests that some features 
of the texts normally considered subjective might be viewed in a far more rigorous and objective 
fashion.  
 
  
                                                                                                                                      
 249 
Chapter Six: Not for Everyone 
This chapter will focus on a very particular feature of Wolfe’s writing, one which is 
difficult to ignore once it is seen, though it can be arduous to establish the connections it relies 
upon in the first place. This involves his use of actual narrative allegory. While in general this 
could imply any kind of symbolic representation, for the purposes of this chapter, allegory is 
characterized by its one-to-one relationship between a character or image and what it represents. 
At its most basic form, this allows Christian in a narrative such as John Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s 
Progress to be a character and an everyman who embodies the struggles of every Christian. 
Wolfe’s use of the form is far more sophisticated, but the allegorical set pieces he employs are 
features which provide plot closure to his work. In the first chapter, we briefly introduced Nick 
Gevers’ speculation on the uncertainty of knowledge in Wolfe’s texts through his treatment of a 
collection of three interlinked novellas, under the umbrella title The Fifth Head of Cerberus 
(1972). However, an understanding of the narrative allegory suffusing the text can eliminate 
much of that uncertainty. 
Peace (1975) and The Fifth Head of Cerberus are Wolfe’s two major works of the 1970s, 
the ones which thrust him to prominence before the public and critical success of The Book of the 
New Sun in the first half of the 1980s. While both would seem to be more open than traditional 
genre novels of the time period, they are often lumped into the New Wave of science fiction, in 
which the prose, style, and theme of science fiction novels began to incorporate many of the 
innovations of mainstream Modernism, including a skepticism of technology and progress which 
had been largely absent throughout the Campbell and Hugo dominated Golden Age of Science 
Fiction. Oddly, both Peace and The Fifth Head of Cerberus seem to have reached a critical 
consensus that, in a vacuum, would elude first time or hasty readers. Obviously, there is no 
                                                                                                                                      
 250 
certain correlation between an author’s intent and consensus, especially when analyzing a Gene 
Wolfe text. However, it is worth talking about these dominant interpretations, for one of these 
conclusions is almost certainly correct and the other the literary equivalent of swallowing bait: a 
solution which does not account for the allegorical closure which Wolfe embeds in the central 
novella of The Fifth Head of Cerberus. The science fictional Fifth Head of Cerberus represents a 
very complex use of the mise en abyme technique in its central novella to represent the biological 
life cycles of the alien species featured in the novel, and this understanding dispels much of the 
murky confusion surrounding the story. 
Initially, the mise en abyme was a technique employed in painting, placing a copy of an 
image inside itself. While there are several ancient examples of its use throughout literary 
history, such as the story of Cupid and Psyche’s marriage planted in the middle of Apuleius’ 
Golden Ass amidst other wedding woe, Andre Gide, who began his writing career associated 
with the symbolist movement, brought it back to the attention of literary criticism in the 1970s: 
The expression “mise en abyme” might well have remained an obscure terminus 
technicus of the heralds, had not André Gide, himself a keen student of heraldry, used it 
to describe a form of self-reflexive embedding found in various art-forms. As Gide 
explained in his journal; “In a work of art I rather like to find transposed, on the scale of 
the characters, the very subject of that work. Thus in paintings by Memling or Quentin 
Metzys, a small dark convex mirror reflects the interior of the room in which the action 
of the painting takes place. Likewise in Velázquez’s painting of the Meniñas ... in the 
play scene in Hamlet and in many other plays. None of these is altogether exact. What 
would explain better what I’d wanted to do in my Cahiers, in Narcise and in La 
                                                                                                                                      
 251 
Tentative, would be a comparison with the device from heraldry that involves putting a 
second representation of the original shield “en abyme” within it”. 
Gide’s use of this term “mise en abyme” was picked up by Magny in his history of the 
French novel and it gradually became part of the analytical lexicon of literary scholars, 
particular after the publication in 1977 of Lucien Dällenbach‟s book Le récit spéculaire, 
which was the first comprehensive attempt at exploring the poetics of mise en abyme. 
(Whatling) 
The central novella of The Fifth Head of Cerberus, though it reads as a mythical “history” of the 
shapeshifting aboriginal inhabitants of one of the twin planets later (supposedly) colonized by 
French and English space travelers, actually functions within the framework of all three novellas 
as an allegorical and symbolic mise en abyme. However, it is easier to see Wolfe’s particularly 
allegorical use of this technique in the embedded stories of his next novel, Peace. 
 While on a first reading Peace seems the rather quiet memories of a retired and ill 
midwestern plant worker and later manager, it is commonly understood to have far more sinister 
narrative depths. General consensus is that Alden Dennis Weer, its narrator, is actually dead, and 
that his spirit wanders the corridors of mutable memories as he turns away from harsh realities, 
which include several accidental deaths, for some of which he bears responsibility. The novel 
contains a series of embedded stories, most of which feature ghosts. In parallel, they provide 
some of the narrative closure that seems to be missing in the surface text. There is no definitive 
textual statement that Weer is dead, as he never comes to that realization throughout the first-
person narrative. The fact is concealed through several key metaphorical connections. The first 
lines of the novel read, “The elm tree planted by Eleanor Bold, the judge’s daughter, fell last 
night. I was asleep and heard nothing, but from the number of shattered limbs and the size of the 
                                                                                                                                      
 252 
turn there must have been a terrible crashing” (Wolfe, Peace 9). Over two hundred pages later, 
the metonymic connection between trees and death is forged when Weer discusses a call with 
another office visitor: “Mrs. Porter? You heard her – she wants to plant a tree on my grave when 
I’m gone. That’s her hobby: she plants trees of endangered American species on the graves of 
her friends” (250). The historical existence of Dutch Elm disease, along with other personal 
features shared by Eleanor Bold and Mrs. Porter, such as golden hair and a fleeting association 
with a boy named Porter, suggest that Eleanor in fact married Porter and took his name; 
however, this terminal inference is actually solidified by the ghost stories which punctuate the 
text. 
 Given how reluctant the reading public was to accept other narrative closures concerning 
Wolfe’s later work such as The Book of the Short Sun, I found the free acceptance of Weer’s 
death to be somewhat disconcerting. The idea that the novel Peace is actually a ghost story is 
readily embraced despite the lack of clear narrative statement; I was not subsequently surprised 
to discover that Wolfe had been uncharacteristically forthright about Weer’s status in interviews. 
Rather than allow an open interpretation, Wolfe freely admitted to the nature of his main 
character in Peace through multiple outlets: 
 JJ: In Peace, is Weer in Purgatory working toward peace? 
 GW: Yeah, I think probably he is. 
 JJ: Is that something you thought about when you wrote it? 
GW: That is not the way I conceived it when I wrote it. I conceived it more that he was a 
ghost trying to make sense of his own life. And I think that is another way of saying that. 
Goodness knows we don’t know much about Heaven and we know even less about Hell 
and we hardly know anything about Purgatory at all. What is it? And if you believe in 
                                                                                                                                      
 253 
ghosts – and I happen to believe in ghosts – what’s going on with them? Long, long ago, 
one of Shakespeare’s contemporaries said that hell is not a place; it is a state: Where I 
am, hell is. (Jordan, “Gene Wolfe Interview” 116-7) 
In another interview, Wolfe also spells this out textually: 
RF: Peace seems to be told by a sidhe, mentioned in the last pages of the book. As if 
some immortal creature lives by constantly reliving. What exactly is going on with Alden 
Weer? 
GW: Weer is dead. In spirit, he is reliving his life, which he confuses with the house he 
built during his final years. Note that at the end of the book Miss Bold asks permission to 
plant a tree on his grave. It is the fall of that tree, at the beginning of the book, that has 
freed his ghost – an old superstition. (Frazier, “The Legerdemain of the Wolfe” 49) 
The logical conclusion to draw concerning the consensus that Weer is dead simply flows from 
the fact that Wolfe has said he is: his intention, in this particular case, is believed without 
question, though it is almost impossible to make this connection on a first reading. In Frazier’s 
interview, Wolfe identifies “Miss Bold” as the one asking about planting a tree, though in the 
text she is only named as Mrs. Porter, a distraction that would be easily overlooked without 
extreme foresight. Since the success of Peace and The Book of the New Sun, Wolfe has become 
increasingly reluctant to discuss his narrative tricks. 
 However, Weer’s death is not the only mystery in Peace, and it is here that readers can 
begin to see Wolfe’s use of the embedded story to provide direct narrative closure. Alden Weer, 
the son of John Weer, spends great portions of his childhood with his Aunt Olivia. Much of the 
drama of the novel involves her potential suitors, and, eventually, she is run down in cold blood 
in the street. One of the embedded fairy stories Weer reads is presented in the text immediately 
                                                                                                                                      
 254 
following a meeting between his aunt and one of her would-be boyfriends, Jim McAfee. As can 
be expected, the story is highly metaphorical: 
 At night the princess lived all alone in her seagirt tower. 
This was (of course) the result of a prophecy made at the queen’s bedside by a certain 
bent and crooked and hairy wizard who had come hobbling up out of the night just when 
the rejoicings were loudest. This wizard, who dressed in wolf-skins and was said to live 
exclusively upon tea, had chanted: 
 “The little maiden you toast here 
 Shall live alone full many a year; 
 And many a wight shall seek her hand, 
 Though she not own a foot of land; 
Earth, sea, and air 
 Will woo the fair, 
 But fire will win her. 
 And though her sire be a king by birth 
Greater, the groom will gin gold from the earth.” 
Naturally the king, though he would have liked to have a wealthy son-in-law, did not care 
for the sound of the word “greater,” and thus the tower on the rock. This cloistered girl’s 
fame spread far and wide, as was no doubt inevitable; and doubtless it occurred to a good 
many people that although there was no way of really knowing what was meant by “fire” 
in the rhyme – after the wedding it could doubtless be explained in a good many ways – it 
seemed quite clear that whoever won her would be a king (or better) and very rich. 
However, there was no place to anchor a ship within miles of the rock, and nearly 
                                                                                                                                      
 255 
everyone who tried to pay court to the unfortunate princess (whose name was Elaia) 
drowned. (Wolfe, Peace 80-81) 
Elaia is the Greek word for olive – clearly, this story is about Weer’s Aunt Olivia’s courtship. 
The description of the suitors also reveals something about their motives. The gnome prince of 
the earth who tries to earn her trust is turned away because “his kisses had tasted too strongly of 
fresh-turned earth” (82). A college teacher at a nearby university, Professor Peacock, takes 
Olivia spelunking with him before they have a falling out, and he clearly corresponds to this 
gnome prince. The man she eventually marries, Julius Smart, starts a successful orange juice 
factory. In a process which only makes sense alchemically, the primary ingredient of his orange 
juice is potatoes – in this way he “gin[s] gold from the earth.”  
 Another embedded story scarcely commented upon is more akin to the Thousand and 
One Nights in its structure. In it, the Marid Naranj gains a slave, Ben Yahya, who is delivered 
directly to the lands of the dead after his long service is done. Naranjo is the Spanish word for 
orange, and Ben Yahya means “son of John” – Weer’s father’s name was John, and Weer 
worked many years for the man who became his uncle in his orange juice factory. These stories 
create an allegorical correlation between the external plot and the metaphorical events relayed 
through them. This is a hallmark of how Wolfe provides narrative closure: the fate of Ben Yahya 
directly informs the fate of Alden Dennis Weer, the son of John. While the existing criticism on 
Peace dwelt strongly on the Eleanor Bold/Mrs. Porter connection, no one seems to have noted 
the correlation between Naranj and the orange magnate Julius Smart. There are several 
embedded stories in Peace; they all contribute to a greater understanding of the surface text and 
are sometimes the only manner in which certain plot lines are resolved, but they are predicated 
                                                                                                                                      
 256 
upon accurately mapping the external details to the corresponding features within each smaller 
narrative. Wolfe adapts this technique in far less obvious ways in his other fiction. 
 Turning back to The Fifth Head of Cerberus, Peter Wright, Robert Borski, and the Alzabo 
Soup podcast all endorse a very particular reading of that sequence of novellas, while Nick 
Gevers emphasizes the ultimate indeterminacy of self-knowledge and conclusions in such an 
ambiguous system. In brief, on the colony planet of Ste. Croix, the narrator, called Number Five, 
grows up in a bizarre environment with his brother David under the tutelage of the “simulated” 
intelligence of their “great-grandfather,” M. Million. He is subjected to the strange experiments 
of their father, known only as Maitre, who is prominent in the community as a scientist and 
brothel keeper. By the end of the first novella, it becomes clear that Number Five is part of a 
clone lineage which includes his father and grandfather, originated by the personality which 
suffered death to be translated into the machine tutor M. Million. Since that original, each 
successive clone (with a sibling outcrossing such as David) establishes the same pattern in an 
attempt to understand why they have not advanced further in Ste. Croix’s society, before killing 
their father and assuming his role in turn. While this plot is presented in a convoluted fashion, 
the true mystery of the novel involves the original inhabitants of a neighboring planet, Ste. Anne. 
Supposedly, shape changing aboriginals once dwelt there, possibly exterminated by the French 
colonists. However, the possibility exists that the aborigines (usually called Abos in the text) 
were more successful in their mimicry than was originally apparent, and that they have actually 
supplanted all human life on both planets. The mouthpiece of this theory is Number Five’s aunt, 
operating under the assumed name Aubrey Veil. 
 The central novella, “A Story by John V. Marsch,” which I argue is an extended 
metaphorical mise en abyme, tells the story of a pair of aboriginal twins separated at birth on Ste. 
                                                                                                                                      
 257 
Anne. The protagonist, Sandwalker, is raised with his mother’s tribe, who call themselves the 
Hill People. As Sandwalker travels the world, he encounters the mysterious, phantasmagorical 
Shadow children and eventually faces his brother Eastwind, who has been raised amongst the 
zealous Marshmen of Ste. Anne. After a Shadow Child bites Eastwind, one brother kills the other 
by sweeping his legs out from under him. The survivor believes himself to be Sandwalker. In the 
third novella, “V.R.T.,” the “human” Dr. Marsch is arrested by the government on Ste. Croix 
after his anthropological studies on Ste. Anne, where he was guided by a young local boy named 
Victor Trenchard. However, at a certain point, Marsch seems to have developed difficulty 
writing and firing his weapon; the shapeshifting aboriginals, who might or might not be extinct 
in the surface story, were notoriously bad with tools, and some of his memories would seem to 
indicate that he is in fact the boy Victor from Ste. Anne. 
Nick Gevers emphasizes the absolute indeterminacy of making conclusions about 
Marsch’s actual nature. His assessment of the middle novella is as follows: 
The reader’s assumption of Marsch’s scholarly and sympathetic creation of a possible 
myth-tale of an exterminated race – distant from any original, genuine narrative – has 
strong implications. The 'Story' is fiction in this light - appealing, with elements of truth, 
but pure speculation. It says much about Marsch and the paradigms of his profession, but 
is a mere codification of fragments of lore and archaeological gossip. The narrative is 
unreliable, however studied and scientific its structure and conclusions may be. In the 
context of this reading, Wolfe is simply implying yet again the limitation of knowledge.  
But when the reader has perused the third novella, 'V.R.T.', another reading - or several - 
is suggested. Marsch may be an aborigine posing as an anthropologist, in which case the 
'Story' is correct in its details, or at least close to truth. Perhaps much genuine insight into 
                                                                                                                                      
 258 
the aborigines is attainable by means of a re-reading of the text. The evidence of artificial 
or second-hand composition alters, becoming natural, suitable to oral folklore being set 
down for the first time. Unfortunately, Wolfe is never so obliging to his readers. It 
remains in doubt whether Marsch is human or aboriginal, and this complicates the text 
into unresolvable ambiguity. No deductions from the 'Story' are certainly valid. In this 
manner, by means of a devious narrative ploy, Wolfe suggests the existential and 
cognitive confusion of his characters. The text in which they are embedded allows no 
definition, of the world or the self. (133-4) 
While the verbiage of uncertainty is never far from discussions of Gene Wolfe and his work, 
most critics are firmer in asserting that Marsch has in fact been replaced by the boy Victor R. 
Trenchard, claiming that this is the source of the title for the third novella (“V.R.T.”), whose 
narration primarily features Marsch. While much of this dissertation has focused on objective 
elements of plot and extrapolating solutions from a narrative data set without a particular critical 
approach to reception in mind, other critics have often drawn conclusions from the text and 
applied their solutions to very specific critical paradigms. For example, Peter Wright has written 
a postcolonial analysis of The Fifth Head of Cerberus based on the assumption that Marsch is in 
fact a shape changing aboriginal. Robert Borski also suggests that this narrative twist is an 
objective feature of the text in his review on Ultan’s Library: 
Taking place on the sister worlds of Sainte Anne and Sainte Croix, Fifth Head consists of 
three semi-linked novellas–besides the opening piece, there is the oddly-titled “‘A Story,’ 
by John V. Marsch” and the closing “V.R.T.” Characters met in the first novella reappear 
in the third, while the fictional constructs encountered in the second–an extended faux 
fable about what life might have been like for the native Annese (or abos) before their 
                                                                                                                                      
 259 
world becomes colonised [sic] by the space-faring French–have real-life counterparts in 
the pieces that bookend it. This interrelatedness, in fact, epitomises [sic] much 
of Fifth Head‘s unique structure; it’s tripartite to be sure, but holistically so, being, as the 
book’s various narrative, tonal and thematic skeins wind in and out and back amongst 
themselves, recursive to the nth degree, like a specular Moebius strip. And if this isn’t 
challenging enough, while the story-telling thrust in the first two novellas is relatively 
straight-forward, “V.R.T” is told anachronically, with the reader left to piece everything 
together from a fragmentary, disjointed narrative, with at least one startling paradigm 
shift not everyone catches on his or her first time through. (Borski, “The Fifth Head of 
Cerberus Reviewed”) 
Peter Wright’s take on the events in “V.R.T.” conjoins with this suggested twist: his article takes 
for granted that the anthropologist Marsch was replaced by his guide somewhere along the way; 
the shapechanging boy decided to live out his dreams and escape his rural background, only to 
be incarcerated and possibly executed or forgotten in the Kafkaesque nightmare of Ste. Croix’s 
Port Mimizon. 
 Wright goes all in on a postcolonial reading of the text. Initially, he acknowledges the 
ambiguity of the surface story:  
Since its publication in 1972, The Fifth Head of Cerberus, Gene Wolfe’s collection of 
three inter-linked novellas, has earned a reputation for being the author’s most perplexing 
single volume. Such a reputation is entirely justified since ambiguity is the watchword to 
the text. More significantly, it is also an organising [sic] principle of form, a means of 
confounding interpretation, and a fundamental theme associated with Wolfe’s defining 
authorial obsessions: the subjectivity of perception, the unreliability of memory, and the 
                                                                                                                                      
 260 
nature of identity. To draw attention to the presence of equivocation in The Fifth Head of 
Cerberus is hardly original as every critic and reviewer to approach the text has cited its 
influence as a source of their own puzzlement, their sense of inadequacy and, at times, 
their despair. ‘Hints, hints, damnable hints and clues! That’s all there is in Gene Wolfe’s 
stories: little pieces of the jigsaw and one is never quite sure that there is a pattern to the 
jigsaw’, declares Bruce Gillespie, making no attempt to disguise his exasperation at his 
subject’s abstruseness. However, few critics have recognised [sic] that the introduction of 
ambiguity in The Fifth Head of Cerberus has a political purpose engaged directly with 
colonial and postcolonial situations and concerns. 
Joan Gordon, for example, observes how the three novellas deploy ‘science fiction 
models, such as aliens and clones, to explore thematic issues of identity and humanity, 
and it uses ambiguity and lack of resolution to express the complexity of those 
ambiguous and unresolvable themes.’ She sees Wolfe’s treatment of his subject matter as 
largely philosophical rather than political, exploring ‘questions raised by abstract and 
universal problems.’ Unfortunately, by approaching the novellas in this way, she fails to 
apprehend that the themes she identifies, ‘humanity and humaneness, identity, and 
memory’, are explored in a postcolonial setting through key postcolonial concepts, 
including mimicry, hybridity and binarism. 
 (Wright, “Confounding the Skin and the Mask”) 
Wolfe truly is invested in a postcolonial effort in The Fifth Head of Cerberus; more generally, 
once a group of people have internalized colonial values from an external source, the resulting 
hybridity is genuinely difficult to separate into component parts. In any such system, both 
colonized and colonizer are affected. Wright goes on to acknowledge:  
                                                                                                                                      
 261 
The ambiguity characterising [sic] The Fifth Head of Cerberus is associated with one 
major theme: the nature of identity. Although the focus of the novellas is individual 
identity: what is the nature of a clone in ‘The Fifth Head of Cerberus’; how can identical 
twins – natural clones – distinguish themselves in ‘”A Story” by John V. Marsch’; and 
how can John V. Marsch/Victor Trenchard prove his identity and purpose to the 
authorities on Sainte Croix in ‘V.R.T.’, there is a more essential question underpinning 
the narratives: who is human? This question arises as a consequence of the uncertain fate 
of the Annese aborigines, who may have been shape-changers capable, as Veil’s 
Hypothesis suggests, of imitating, both physically and psychologically, the original 
French colonists, whom they killed and replaced, without even remembering their 
actions. Through this possibility, Wolfe draws attention to the likely psychological and 
cultural outcomes of contact between white human colonists and an aboriginal people, 
through the metaphor of the amnesiac shapeshifter, an individual capable of forgetting its 
own near-perfect mimicry. 
The concept of mimicry is essential to postcolonial theory. The term is used to describe 
the ambivalent relationship between coloniser [sic] and colonised [sic]. It occurs when 
colonial discourse and ideology encourages the colonised [sic] subject to adopt the 
coloniser’s [sic] cultural habits, assumptions, institutions and values, resulting in a copy – 
often blurred – of the coloniser’s [sic] traits. Since it is science fiction, The Fifth Head of 
Cerberus has the capacity to address the consequences of mimicry more starkly than 
mimetic or realist fiction. 
Above, Wright acknowledges the possibility that Victor Trenchard might be the “Marsch” 
arrested in Port Mimizon, and he continues to paint a picture of the terrible power imbalances 
                                                                                                                                      
 262 
and bureaucratic abuse of the colonizers. However, Wright’s critique of humanity goes well 
beyond the text:  
Wolfe develops his condemnation of mimicry through Veil’s Hypothesis which, in the 
text, is ironically discredited by the ‘veiled’ woman – Aunt Jeannine – who proposed it. 
She suggests that it arose as a result of Veil’s desire to find ‘a dramatic explanation for 
the cruelty and irrationality he sees around him.’ However, there is irony here, too, since, 
if the aborigines imitated humans, then the cruelty they (re-)enact in the place of the 
human is human cruelty. Nowhere is this more apparent than in ‘“A Story” by John V. 
Marsch’, where aborigine-mimics – Eastwind’s people – sacrifice members of 
Sandwalker’s tribe, who are themselves mimicking humans. Whatever way the reader 
considers Aunt Jeannine’s rebuttal of Veil’s theory, he or she must concede that Wolfe is 
drawing attention both to human ‘cruelty and irrationality’ and to the corruption of an 
alien culture compelled by human interference and their power of mimicry to re-enact it. 
Significantly, postcolonial theorists have seen mimicry as bordering on mockery, ‘since it 
can appear to parody whatever it mimics. Mimicry therefore locates a crack in the 
certainty of colonial dominance, an uncertainty in its control of the behaviour [sic] of the 
colonised [sic].’ This is precisely what the shapeshifters of Sainte Anne effect: a mockery 
of white, Western colonial authority, which can be imitated, replicated and perpetuated 
by a pre-Dendritic culture any coloniser would term primitive in its full pejorative sense.  
Here, Wright inexplicably claims that the natives on Ste. Croix participating in sacrifice and 
bloodshed amongst each other are imitating humans, but no humans have yet touched down on 
the planet. There is no such mimicry to blame for their behavior. In addition, Wright has latched 
onto a term used to describe the aboriginals, predendritic, which is employed in the text by 
                                                                                                                                      
 263 
Marsch to describe aboriginal culture but has no true anthropological meaning. A dendrite 
merely branches out like a tree, and, though he is unaware of it, Wright has unwittingly latched 
onto one method of identifying the aboriginals, which shall be expanded upon below. All of 
these claims of the irreconcilable mystery and ambiguity of the text don’t spend much time 
looking at actual patterns which emerge from the text. 
Even though The Fifth Head of Cerberus is an explicitly science fictional novel, the 
approach to its mysteries generally lack scientific rigor. The collection of novellas directly 
indicates that the aboriginals are not very good with their hands, but the text repeatedly points 
towards another identifying feature. While readers are busy looking for signs of characters with 
poorly functioning hands, they miss the fact that Port Mimizon, the city in which Number Five 
grows up (with a French-sounding name very close to mimicry) is structured around fingers and 
a thumb. Indeed, its official district is called the departement de la main, or the Department of 
the Hand. Furthermore, the women in Number Five’s father’s brothel all have very suspicious 
looking legs. Indeed, all the women in the text do: 
Two of my father’s demimondaines were waiting in the hall, costumed and painted until 
they seemed more alien than any abos, stately as Lombardy poplars and inhuman as 
specters. … One of the girls giggled; they were seated on the divan now, their long, 
gleaming legs crossed before them like the varnished staffs of flags.” (Wolfe, Fifth Head 
of Cerberus 32-3) 
This odd, thin leg imagery is repeated many times, and here it is even conjoined to the tree 
imagery of Lombardy poplars. When Number Five first meets his Aunt Jeanine, who goes by the 
name Aubrey Veil in her professional life, she has crippled and useless legs, having some 
prosthetic device which allows her to float. She is described later as follows: “[Aunt Jeanine’s] 
                                                                                                                                      
 264 
black skirt, lying emptily against the leg boards of the chair like a collapsed tenet, showed legs 
no thicker than my wrists, but also an odd thickening, almost like a saddle, below her hips” (52). 
 Later, when Number Five meets Phaedria, a local girl who embroils him and his brother 
into a life of petty crime and acting, she is introduced with a leg injury: “Toward noon I was 
joined, not on my own bench, but on another close enough for there to be a feeling of proximity, 
by a dark-haired girl with one ankle in a cast” (37). Another of the girls is also described in a 
very particular fashion: “I have thought since, many times, of that girl as I saw her leaving: the 
high-heeled platform shoes and grotesquely long legs, the backless dress dipping an inch below 
the coccyx” (72). Here, those long legs are almost unsettling and unnatural looking to Number 
Five. In the middle novella, Sandwalker, an aboriginal, is born in a very particular way: “The 
second came not as they are ordinarily born – that is, head foremost as a man climbs from a 
lower place into a high – but feet foremost as a man lets himself down into a lower place … and 
for that reason his feet beat the ground for a time with no one to draw him forth” (86). Soon, he 
encounters a female aboriginal, and there is some indication in her talk that sexual dimorphism 
concerning the ability to walk is an actual feature of the aboriginal life cycle. The aboriginal girl, 
Seven Girls Waiting, describes her difficulties: “There was nothing anywhere. Pink Butterflies 
was new, and I could not walk far....” 
Sandwalker says, “I have never known that ... but I know how it must feel, sitting alone, 
waiting for them to come when no one comes. It must be a terrible thing.” 
Her response, though it is not explicit, suggests the gender difference: “You are a man. It 
will not come to you until you are old” (100). Sandwalker and the girl travel for a time together, 
and the narrative reveals that “Seven Girls Waiting was stumbling by the time they reached [the 
river]” (103). Whether their initial discussion involves locomotion or not, she clearly remains 
                                                                                                                                      
 265 
much less sure-footed and capable of walking over long distances than Sandwalker. 
Additionally, when Sandwalker was born, his grandmother undertook a very ritualistic approach 
to helping his mother recover: “Her mother began to scoop the sand with her hands, and when 
she reached that which still held the strength of the dead day’s sun, she heaped it over her 
daughter’s legs” (86). In this way, the healing rays of the sun are allowed to saturate into the new 
mother. Certainly, this resembles the fashion in which a tree’s roots might soak up the soil’s 
nutrients and the sun. 
 Continually throughout “A Story,” Sandwalker is described by the manner in which he 
plants his feet, as are all of the aboriginals: “The dream Sandwalker strode to him, feet lifting 
high, scarcely splashing when they came down” (106). His walking becomes linked to a very 
awkward gait: “[Sandwalker] tried again, and in a few hundred steps developed a method of 
walking which was reasonably silent. Knees high, he moved his feet quickly across the water and 
put them down with the whole foot arched like a diver. Like a wading bird, he thought.” (110) 
 When the aboriginals are first described, their beliefs are emphasized strongly. Curiously, 
their mating with trees is invoked: 
“[The aborigines] would have told you that their magic and their religion, the songs they 
sang and the traditions of their people were what were important. They killed their 
sacrificial animals with flails of seashells that cut like razors, and they didn’t let their men 
father children until they had stood enough fire to cripple them for life. They mated with 
trees and drowned the children to honor their rivers.” (19-20) 
It is worth remembering that this description links scars and crippling with the aboriginals. Later 
descriptions of supposedly French children on Ste. Anne after the war describe them with scars, 
and some of the officials on Ste. Croix also bear some prominent head scars, though they are 
                                                                                                                                      
 266 
purportedly human. One of Number Five’s dreams also resonates with a large circle of trees that 
exists on Ste. Anne: 
Once I had dreamed of standing in a paved court fenced with Corinthian pillars so close 
set that I could not force my body between them. … I had noticed that each column was 
carved with a word – the only one that I could remember was carapace – and that the 
paving stones of the courtyard were mortuary tablets like those set in the floors in some 
of the old French churches, with my own name and a different date on each. (50)  
While this dream invokes the clones in Number Five’s past line and the date of their deaths, the 
pillars which surround him are also symbolic of his current situation, ensconced as he is in a 
brothel of long-legged women. These pillars also resonate with the Annese natural temple of 
trees, which seems to have been destroyed in recent years: 
The Annese temple (or observatory) has now been ruined by these settler’s need for 
timber, all the trees cut except a few half-rotten ones. … There were four hundred and 
two trees … spaced approximately a hundred and ten feet apart so that they formed a 
circle about three miles in diameter. (196) 
 In “A Story,” trees are suspiciously active in the text: “Sandwalker greeted the tree 
ceremoniously, asking permission to drink and promising not to stay long. A murmuring of 
leaves answered him, and though he could not understand the words they did not seem angry” 
(99). Even in the third novella, the native life on Ste. Anne, as described in the present day, 
seems hauntingly bizarre: 
“We saw a great many people almost every day, many animals and birds, trees that were 
alive, just as you and I have traveling, as you say for these four days – though this is still 
                                                                                                                                      
 267 
not the back of beyond where one sees gods come floating down the river on logs, and 
trees gone traveling.” (166) 
It should be noted once again that Marsch describes the culture as predendritic. Given that Seven 
Girls Waiting implied to Sandwalker that the immobility from which she suffered (whatever the 
cause) would not come to him until his old age, it could very well be that the final stage of the 
male aboriginal life cycle involves a sessile tree stage, in which the aborigine develops, as per 
Number Five’s dream, a “carapace.” However, there is more than one indigenous species present 
on Ste. Croix according to “A Story,” and the other species, the Shadow children, seems even 
more bizarre. 
 They are described as twisted and tiny humanoid creatures who are always biting in “A 
Story,” but they seem to share a psychic link with one another. In one scene, they take control of 
hostile marshmen aborigines by mounting their shoulders and gouging at their eyes. Their 
rhetoric changes as they become outnumbered, as their empathic telepathic power confuses their 
identity with those around them. It is worth looking at a few of the descriptions of Shadow 
children within the text itself. Their bite is definitely considered dangerous: “Women at the 
sleeping place, wishing to frighten children still playing when their shadows were longer than 
themselves, said the Shadow children’s teeth dripped poison” (92). When Sandwalker meets 
them, he is confident that their size will allow him to face them without danger to himself: “He 
was equally sure now that whether the poisoned bite was real or not, he could deal with the 
diminutive figure facing him” (93). 
However, the power of the Shadow children is, as they claim, in the mind: “We shake 
extension; and I am the song all the Shadow children sing, their thought when they think as one. 
Hold your hands before you thus, not touching. Now think of your hands gone. That is what we 
                                                                                                                                      
 268 
shake” (96). The Shadow children extend beyond merely physical parameters and are capable of 
mentally controlling the hostile marshmen: “The marshman who had dropped to his knees a 
moment before rose shakily, and guided by the Shadow child on his shoulders staggered away” 
(112). The Shadow child insists that “Only the mind is significant” (113). It is worth exploring 
one other feature of the Shadow children: “The silent Shadow Child, who seemed less real than 
the gossamer figure he crouched beside, returned the chewed fiber to his mouth and wandered 
away” (128). The leaves that they chew from the trees on Ste. Anne seem to have some kind of 
white eggs within them, and it is this which the Shadow children claim make them as god. When 
one of them bites Eastwind in the arm, he says, “By our power I made the stars to fall; but I now 
do a greater magic. I make you Sandwalker and Sandwalker you. … That which swam in my 
mouth swims in his veins now” (141). Given that Sandwalker dreamed that he was dead earlier 
in the novel, and the fact that the “Sandwalker” who lives at the end of “A Story” notes an 
aching arm, the most definitive clue that Eastwind actually survives “A Story” and drowns his 
brother involves Sandwalker’s association with feet: the dead brother’s legs are swept out from 
under him before he is drowned. Afterwards, the surviving brother goes down to greet the first 
human explorers as they arrive. Later, in “V.R.T.,” Trenchard’s father will claim, “that great 
ancestor of mine who is sometimes called The Eastwind came down to make a peace with [the 
first French Landers]” (195). Of course, the big difference between Eastwind and Sandwalker 
was that Eastwind underwent ritual castration to become a holy man of the marshmen. This 
complicates the literal reading of the story, but it actually highlights a metaphorical difference 
that is quite clear: Sandwalker has functioning genitals; Eastwind does not have a mechanism for 
sexual reproduction. 
                                                                                                                                      
 269 
 Eastwind also has a name which invokes the air, and in “V.R.T.” the Shadow children, 
too, become associated with the air. At one point, a native of Ste. Anne says, “Don’t ask me how 
small children are” (158). In another scene, Victor Trenchard describes them as light enough to 
float: 
“The Shadow Children of course came to steal by evening, riding up in the bubbles and 
the foam from the springs – then my mother would not let me go out from beneath her 
hair … they’ll get all around, and then they’ll all run in at once, biting; but if you turn 
quickly and shout, they never do, and there are never as many of them as they think, 
because some are only in the minds of the others so that at the time to fight they fade 
back into each other and become one lonely.” (167) 
The Shadow children, then, are highly associated with biting. Marsch eventually claims that he 
won’t be able to write because the boy’s cat (whom he eventually kills) bites him. Readings of 
The Fifth Head of Cerberus which assert that the boy takes his place also have a difficult time 
dealing with this textual feature. The boy has a clear affection for the cat, and, at one point, 
Marsch even suspects that they might somehow be lovers. 
 This biting is also an implied threat whenever the cat is near. It approaches Marsch on 
several occasions: “[I was alone] with only the wind and the sun and the sighing of the great 
trees that trailed their roots in the murmuring water before me. Alone I should say except for our 
camp-follower cat, who came meowing up and had to be chased after the mules with rocks.” 
(171). Readers should also note the presence of sighing trees in this scene. 
 Finally, it is worth relating one of the incarcerated “Marsch’s” final visions: 
For a moment I thought I saw my cat flying like a shadow in the dark, and I wondered if 
she were really dead, though I broke her neck. The day before I found the burial cave for 
                                                                                                                                      
 270 
him, she brought me a little animal and laid it at my feet. I told her that she was a good 
cat and could eat it herself, but she only said, “My master, the Marquis of Carabas, sends 
you greetings.” And disappeared again. The little animal had a pointed snout and round 
ears, but its teeth were the even, biting teeth of a human being, and it smiled in its agony. 
(247) 
Here, this vision suggests that the cat flies “like a shadow,” and a being which matches the 
description of the Shadow children from “A Story” is introduced to Marsch, with biting teeth. At 
this point it is also worth noting that the opening epigraph of the third novella, “V.R.T.,” is from 
Karel Capek’s “From the Point of View of a Cat.” It reads, “But don’t think that I am at all 
interested in you. You have warmed me, and now I will go out again and listen to the dark 
voices” (145). It is perhaps not difficult at this point to speculate why Wolfe might have opened 
this particular novella with the cat as narrator. 
Hopefully these extensive quotes indicate that there are very real differences between the 
Shadow children and the aborigines on Ste. Anne. They should also display that the aborigines, 
especially the females, tend to be associated with odd and brittle legs, as are Aunt Jeanine and 
Phaedria, while the Shadow children are of ambiguous physical status, but are small and 
definitely tied to biting. Readers who look back at the initial novella will recall that there have 
been no new buildings constructed on Port Mimizon on Ste. Croix for almost two hundred years, 
and, when Marsch returns there from Ste. Anne, he is arrested in a nightmarish and Kafkaesque 
bureaucracy from which he will probably never escape. Three men who are described in a very 
peculiar fashion arrest Marsch: “I noticed how similar their faces were, all three with pointed 
chins, black brows and narrow eyes, so that they might have been brothers” (180). If 
shapeshifters and mimics were to dominate a place like Port Mimizon (named, after all, for 
                                                                                                                                      
 271 
mimicry), they might soon come to resemble one another in the absence of fresh and diverse 
humans to imitate. Having presented many of the important textual patterns which punctuate The 
Fifth Head of Cerberus, I will now proceed to the consensus reading of the text. 
 Almost everyone assumes that Dr. Marsch is replaced by the boy Victor Trenchard. The 
journal contains an explicit scene in which Marsch is bitten by a cat which has attached itself to 
the supposedly half-aboriginal boy, and as a result of this he claims to be unable to write for 
several days. On a first reading, the cat bite might be accepted as the reason for his poor 
handwriting. A second reading, where the memories Marsch records while in prison would seem 
to better fit the boy Victor Trenchard, might indicate that the cat bite is just an excuse for his 
poor aboriginal penmanship. In sublime fashion, the cat bite actually did cause Marsch’s 
inability to write, but for a different reason implied in the subtext of the novella. The consensus 
reading of Marsch dying and being replaced by Victor Trenchard would require that the scene 
which depicts the death of Trenchard would be entirely fabricated. It occurs as follows: “The boy 
is dead. … I saw him fall. He tried to grasp a rock, then screamed and dropped down. … 
Downstream a long way, a big tree stood grasping the rock, with water at his feet, and had thrust 
out a root to catch my friend” (243). One of the features which lends veracity to this scene is the 
attempt of the tree to catch the boy; we shall return to whether this scene might be considered 
true or an outright fabrication soon, but analytical consensus asserts that it is a simple lie, and 
that Marsch dies while Victor Trenchard takes his place. 
 Nick Gevers attempts to make sense of this “death of Trenchard” scene by claiming that 
the truth is simply indeterminable. He claims that “The precise significance of '"A Story" by 
John V. Marsch' can never be ascertained, like the identity of its narrator. (142) He goes on to 
say: 
                                                                                                                                      
 272 
By creating a narrative whose fragments can be read as the products of either character, 
Wolfe generates an ambiguity of a new kind: if the Self is to be discovered, whose Self 
will it be? The mystery of this novella is challenging to the reader, who must assimilate a 
multitude of clues, both logical ones and ones implicit in the flow of the narrative. If the 
reader cannot solve the puzzle of Marsch's true nature – and any conclusion is tenuous - 
the problem of self-knowledge is made yet more intractable. […] 
This is the centre of the novella's literary mystery. Did V.R.T. die in the Annese 
wilderness, by falling among the rocks, as Marsch's journal claims? (FHC, 185) Or did he 
survive to assume Marsch's role, after the anthropologist died or was murdered? If the 
latter is true, V.R.T. wrote the final field expedition diary entries, and all the essays and 
ramblings of prisoner no. 143. There is considerable evidence for the idea that V.R.T is 
an aboriginal, in both sets of writings; if he is mimicking Marsch, he does so imperfectly. 
(143-145) 
 As is the tendency with uncertain analysis, soon Gevers begins to doubt the sincerity of the 
character writing the material presented in “V.R.T.”: 
The foremost possibility is that, just as the anthropologist Marsch could write 'A Story' 
with an aboriginal setting, he could also construct the imaginary perspective of an alien 
youth trying to be human. He might do this out of simple interest, or, more likely, as a 
way of arousing the attention of his captors and so escaping prison as an alien celebrity. 
He attempts to conceal the 'alien' writings when he becomes aware that his pages are 
annoying and not intriguing the prison authorities; he plans to destroy the sheets, and 
claims the references to V.R.T's parents were mere 'imagination', parts of a plan for a 
'novel'. (FHC, 182) But, of course, V.R.T. might wish to hide his alien nature for the 
                                                                                                                                      
 273 
same reason, to avoid antagonising [sic] the interrogators and warders. […] Perhaps the 
man in prison is insane; his closing field journal entries contain a description of a 
conversation with a cat. (FHC, 188) Perhaps the views of St. Croix are correct, Marsch is 
an assassin, and the entire journal and all the prison notes are an ingenious subterfuge: in 
one interrogation, the questioner produces evidence that the journal was bogus, and that 
Marsch's story is a lie. (147) 
Gevers assumes that the “insoluble riddle” of Marsch’s identity prevents readers from believing 
or disbelieving in the validity of the middle novella. The final impact of all of this, according to 
Gevers, is to assert the impossibility of knowing the self. However, there are only a few 
possibilities. One of them is that Marsch is a human being persecuted by other human beings. 
Another is that he is a human being unjustly incarcerated by shapeshifting aborigines who have 
replaced the people of Ste. Croix. A third is that he is an aborigine who has taken the place of 
Marsch and is now suffering at the hands of human beings. A fourth is that he is an aborigine 
incarcerated by aborigines who do not know what they are. The final option, the one which the 
mise en abyme of the second novella suggests, is that he is something else, a Shadow child 
gestalt infected by a cat bite, who is being persecuted by the aboriginals who have long since 
taken over Port Mimizon. After all, the Shadow children wind up riding marshmen in the middle 
novella, and it is only natural that, as literal as Wolfe is, the Shadow children wind up riding the 
man Marsch through the bite which infects him. After all, Marsch said that the cat bite caused his 
inability to write, and the bite switched Eastwind and Sandwalker a moment before Sandwalker’s 
feet were swept out from under him in “A Story.” Victor Trenchard, too, fell to his death when 
he lost his footing, falling into the river where Sandwalker died. In other words, every scene in 
Wolfe should be read as literally and metaphorically true. When the size of Shadow children is 
                                                                                                                                      
 274 
questioned, they very well might be a microscopic organism capable of infecting others through 
a bite and maintaining a confused gestalt identity through their mental ability. This biological 
metaphor is also suggested by the very literal dream in which Marsh sees the cat flying like a 
shadow, and it introduces a biting Shadow child to him. Wolfe’s allegorical set pieces often 
make sense when they are defined in such a fashion; otherwise, the dreams seem inexplicable.  
 These narrative conclusions are suggested through the allegorical set pieces which can be 
restated and applied to the greater narrative. Nick Gevers maintains that the inconclusiveness of 
the texts: 
[S]uggests to the typical reader of Science Fiction, who assumes the accessibility and 
moral constancy of a character, the difficulty of defining identity, of finding the Self. The 
Fifth Head of Cerberus defines character as indefinable, subverting both personal quests 
for self-knowledge and the complacent certainties of the act of reading. Wolfe's 
subversive purpose extends to a second concern, the relationship of human and alien. 
Again in the conventional terms of Science Fiction, the alien is either a simple menace or 
a standard of strangeness subject to the ingenious if gradual comprehension of the 
standard, competent hero. Most experimental writers who portray the alien - such as 
Ursula Le Guin - modify this, making of the act of understanding the alien a sentimental 
and moral triumph (148) 
In prison, Marsch records the childhood memories of both Victor Trenchard and John Marsch 
because the cat telepathically formed a gestalt understanding with them just as the Shadow 
children do with Sandwalker and Eastwind in “A Story.” However, he is still clearly “different” 
to the denizens of Ste. Croix when he arrives there, as multiple clues suggest. The legs of the 
female aborigines who believe themselves to be humans are another clearly unusual element in 
                                                                                                                                      
 275 
the text, as is the fact that Port Mimizon is actually constructed in the shape of a huge hand. 
Readers looking for useless hands to help them identify aboriginals in the text need only draw a 
map of Port Mimizon to find one. It is in this way that Wolfe’s symbolism achieves a kind of 
rigorous logic that conjoins with his purpose: there is a huge useless hand of the aboriginals, but 
it is not the kind of hand readers expect, since it is geographical. 
 Before leaving behind The Fifth Head of Cerberus, it is worth recording a final symbolic 
image. When Number Five meets his Aunt Jeanine, she follows him down a helical staircase. He 
runs down it naturally, but, since she cannot walk with her useless legs, she floats down the 
center, looking at Number Five the entire time: 
With her long skirt hanging as straight as a curtain she was floating suspended, watching 
me, in the center of the stairwell. … As I fled around and around the spiral she revolved 
with me, turning toward me always a face extraordinarily like my father’s, one hand 
always on the railing. When we had descended to the second floor she swooped down 
and caught me as easily as a cat takes charge of an errant kitten, and led me through 
rooms and passages where I had never been permitted to go until I was as confused as I 
might have been in a strange building. (Wolfe, The Fifth Head of Cerberus 29) 
It should be noted that the aboriginals imitate humanity by looking upon them, and this scene 
shows Aunt Jeanine floating down a helix without actually walking down it: the cloned Number 
Five physically runs down the helix, but this scene, too, is a symbolically weighted one which 
indicates Aunt Jeanine’s humanity is not attained via normal genetic ends. In a novel written 
during the 1970s about cloning and genetic engineering, a helix can only symbolize one thing – a 
DNA strand. In this fashion, Wolfe makes his embedded scene illustrate a much larger plot point 
                                                                                                                                      
 276 
about Aunt Jeanine’s true genetic nature. Her legs only reinforce this fact, as does the dream 
Number Five has the very night he meets her:  
That night – I am reasonably sure it was the same night – I dreamed of the abos of Sainte 
Anne, abos dancing with plumes of fresh grass on their heads and arms and ankles, abos 
shaking their shields of woven rushes and their nephrite tipped spears until the motion 
affected my bed and became, in shabby red cloth, the arms of my father’s valet come to 
summon me, as he did almost every night, to his library. (33-4) 
The juxtaposition of meeting Aunt Jeanine with his first dreams of the abos is another pattern 
quite telling in its implications. Even the title of the third novella, “V.R.T.,” is not as 
straightforward as it appears. In engineering, variance reduction techniques (V.R.T.) are a means 
of reaching a solution through a successive series of approximations. This is also clearly 
intentional on Wolfe’s part, as he directly mentions a type of V.R.T., relaxation, in The Fifth 
Head of Cerberus: 
[Cloning] has been done in some chains a number of times. We have borrowed a term 
from engineering to describe it, and call it the process of relaxation … There are 
problems which are not directly soluble, but which can be solved by a succession of 
approximations. … As the levels of approximation progress, the successive sets become 
more and more similar until there is essentially no change.” (75) 
Wolfe must be approached with a scientific rigor, and pattern observation remains one of the key 
aspects of understanding what is occurring in his texts. When the symbols begin to congeal and 
the small details make a kind of sense, the intended solution begins to emerge. When Gevers 
confronts the corkscrew staircase, he draws a quite different conclusion: 
                                                                                                                                      
 277 
As a boy, Number Flve comes upon hitherto unfamiliar sections of the 'Maison du Chien', 
such as 'a stairwell far toward the back of the house, a corkscrew, seldom-used flight, 
very steep, with only a low iron banister between the steps and a six-storey drop into the 
cellars'. (FHC, 15) The devious design of such architectures, with their hidden recesses 
and dangerous traps, symbolizes the perilous intricacy of the search for self-knowledge, 
its obscurity and unreliable enigmas. As in his novel Peace (1975), Wolfe makes the 
house an elaborate and systematic metaphor for the complexity and harrowing dilemmas 
of the protagonist's mind. (125-6) 
Gevers continues to maintain that “all conclusions pointed by the text are – and this is by design 
– unreliable” (113). However, a more symbolic understanding of the story tends to clear up much 
of the ambiguity and confusion. The population of Port Mimizon has long since been replaced by 
aboriginals who no longer understand their natural life cycle, which would eventually culminate 
in a tree-like sessile shell. Wolfe’s embedded narratives are used to provide otherwise missing 
exposition throughout his entire career. 
In Chapter Four, I briefly mentioned the idea that the planets Green and Blue in The Book 
of the Short Sun were actually Urth and Verthandi (Mars) from The Book of the New Sun, though 
this seems to be an impossibility in the surface text, where the protagonist, through astral travel, 
seems to visit all of the worlds in question, and there is little obvious indication of travel through 
time. Additionally, the flooding of Urth at the end of The Book of the New Sun heavily 
encourages readers to look at the possibility that Blue is Urth and that Green is the terraformed 
and forested Lune, also green in Book of the New Sun. Wolfe’s outright denial that Blue and 
Green were Urth and Lune in an interview is actually convincing; however, the manner in which 
he conceals the changes to the solar system are so metaphorical as to go beyond the merely 
                                                                                                                                      
 278 
cryptic. In addition to setting, Wolfe has also to some degree concealed the identity of the 
narrator in The Book of the Short Sun. Horn, father of Hide and Hoof, is sent to look for Patera 
Silk, the great man who led the people of Viron out of the generation starship called the Whorl 
but did not leave himself. Eventually, Horn dies, but his spirit is cast into the body of Silk still on 
the Whorl. The conglomeration of Horn and Silk remains confused about his identity throughout 
the novel, insisting that he is Horn even as everyone around him attempts to convince him that he 
is indeed Silk. Horn’s son Hide eventually catches up to the man who claims to be his father, and 
he tells this story: 
When Hoof and I were real little we used to play in the pools up above your mill. … One 
time we found a really pretty one, that had a lot of pretty little fish in it, and spotted frogs. 
Green with blue spots, I think. … Well, while we were looking at them we saw this one 
leech, a red one. It was pretty big. It was swimming right at one of the frogs, and me and 
Hoof yelled for it to look out. … Only the frog didn’t pay attention, and just about the 
time it opened its mouth I figured out that it thought the leech was a fish, and it was going 
to eat it. … The frog got it in its mouth and spit it out, and it swam around in back where 
the frog couldn’t get at it, and fastened onto the back of its head. When we came back 
there was a dead frog, only the leech was gone. What I was thinking of was they don’t 
look enough like fish, not really, to fool us. But that one fooled the frog, he thought it was 
a little fish, and it probably fooled the fish, too. Jahlee fooled me the same way until you 
told me. I thought there was two women in the house, an old one and the young one, but 
they were both her.” (Wolfe, In Green’s Jungles 345) 
In this scene, Hide is talking about the vampiric inhuma Jahlee, who appears to be two different 
women when she was only one. In much the same fashion, his story is actually about two places 
                                                                                                                                      
 279 
that appear to be two different places when they are in fact only one. In it, the red leech resonates 
with red Mars (in addition, the doubled Bluvian life serves as an allusion to Edgar Rice 
Burroughs’ Mars books), which destroys the green frog and imitates it. This, then, is the method 
Wolfe choses to embed the fate of the solar system into The Book of the Short Sun: Red Mars 
creeps closer and closer to Green Lune and destroys it – here, the leech and the frog are stand-ins 
for red and green planetary bodies. This talk of mimicry even has a metatextual component.  
Hide also asks, “Couldn’t Jahlee come back with a new face, pretending to be someone 
we didn’t know?” (344). Her own mutable inhumi nature becomes embedded in the metaphor. 
The parasite “attaches” itself to orbit. In this scenario, if Lune is the green frog, it has been 
destroyed. However, Hide has no conception of the cosmic significance of the story he has just 
told. Later, that red leech comes up again when Hide becomes curious about why the Vanished 
People seem so different: “You said the Vanished People probably don’t look much like us … 
Only the inhumi look almost exactly like us. They do to us, I mean, just like that red leech I told 
about looked like a fish to the frogs” (Wolfe, In Green’s Jungles 350). That red leech might be 
able to explain, through a strange kind of word association with “The Tale of the Boy Called 
Frog” in The Book of the New Sun, why the Vanished People bear so little resemblance to the 
humans left behind on Urth and in the Whorl, with its metaphorical depiction of tree-human 
hybridity. Soon, their conversation proceeds: 
“I was going to say this isn’t about the Vanished People. Only I have a feeling it is, that 
you’ll tie it up someday.” 
“I’ll tie it up, as you put it, right now. You said that the Vanished People were wiser and 
stronger than we are, which is certainly true. You also said that the inhumi become like 
us, not merely in appearance but in speech, thought, and action, in order to prey upon us. 
                                                                                                                                      
 280 
… Since we know that the inhumi preyed upon the Neighbors – the Vanished People, as 
we call them here – with great success, it seems reasonable that they could counterfeit 
them at least as well as they counterfeit us, and very plausibly better. Will you agree to 
that as well? … 
“Think of the two whorls as they were thousand[s] and thousands of years ago. The 
Vanished People were here on Blue, the inhumi on Green, where they preyed upon the 
great beasts in its jungles. They exterminated the Vanished People, Hide, or very nearly – 
that’s why they vanished. Why didn’t they exterminate the beasts on Green long before?” 
(352-3) 
Here, the mystery of the imitative leech leads back to the cosmological uncertainty the characters 
in the text have about the Vanished People. 
 Elsewhere, readers might parse exactly how the generational spaceship sent by Typhon 
actually traveled in a large circular path to repopulate Urth, like an SF version of Noah’s ark, 
through another embedded story that Silk tells about a boy and his mother who left their home in 
Viron and then came back: 
“A boy – I’ve forgotten his name, but his doesn’t matter – and his mother were returning 
to the city after living for a year or so in the country. … [T]his boy and his mother had 
moved to the country, living in a remote farmhouse where the boy, who was still quite 
small, was happy in the possession of a wood and a stream too wide to jump; but lonely 
all the same. Now they had decided to return to the city. It was a long journey as the boy 
measured journeys then, though he had ridden most of the way in a sort of cart pushed by 
his mother that carried their belongings. 
                                                                                                                                      
 281 
“She was very tired, and they stopped on the outskirts to spend the night with a friend 
before going into the city to the neat little house that another kind friend – a male friend 
who I suppose must have slept there from time to time, since he kept a razor there – had 
arranged for them to occupy some years earlier.” (Wolfe, Return to the Whorl 209) 
As the protagonist continues to tell the story, he reveals that the boy did not fall asleep even 
though the mother did. Oreb asks if the boy was good, and our protagonist answers, “Not 
particularly, Oreb, though he thought he was, because his mother loved him. He was not old 
enough to understand that she would always love him, whether he behaved well or badly.” At 
this point, he breaks off his story for a thematically important aside, noting that the burning of 
the quarter twenty years ago has left it almost as desolate as the City of the Inhumi on Green. He 
then continues: 
“I want to finish my little tale. I’ll interrupt it if I see anything worth commenting on. … 
The boy decided to take a short walk. He was hoping to find another child; but he was 
very conscious of the danger of becoming lost, so he walked only along the road upon 
which the house in which he and his mother were staying stood, reasoning that he could 
always retrace his steps and return to her. … Distracted by something or other, he became 
confused about the direction in which he had been walking. Thinking that he was 
returning to his mother and the house in which they were staying, he walked a long way 
until he saw an old man in black weeping upon the steps of a manteion. Until that time, 
the boy had been afraid to ask for help; but the old man looked so good and kind that the 
boy approached him and, after a minute or two of silent squirming … he said, ‘Why are 
you crying?’ 
                                                                                                                                      
 282 
“The old man looked up, and seeing him pointed to the carts, wagons, and litters that 
passed them every few seconds. ‘If the wrongs I have done the gods were visible … there 
would be more than those, and four men would not be enough to weep for them all.’” 
(Wolfe, Return to the Whorl 210) 
The protagonist and his companions walk on in silence, seeing the hovels made of salvaged 
timbers, until Pig finally asks if that is the end of the story. Silk’s bird Oreb asks if the boy ever 
found his home. “Yes, he did. … But he was not the same boy … And that is not the same 
home.” 
Begging leave of their company and promising to rejoin them later, the man who will 
become the Rajan of Gaon goes on alone. When he arrives at the cenoby where Silk once served, 
inside he finds “weeds and blackberry brambles, and – yes – a straggling grape vine climbing the 
blackened stump of the fig tree. Enough of their arbor remained to sit on” (213). This return to a 
place which was once home, overrun by weeds and vines, is highly symbolic of what has 
actually happened to humanity as a whole, which has become lost, and whose cities have 
crumbled beneath the weight of all that potentially hostile vegetation. 
In the story the protagonist tells, some of the background details of The Book of the Long 
Sun are certainly implied, which include the old rumors of the Caldé’s folly and Silk’s childhood 
with his mother, in which they may have been sent out of town to avoid the fallout over Caldé 
Tussah’s fall from grace (for purchasing an illegal embryo which was eventually grown into 
Silk). In addition, the story represents the most explicit metaphor for the Plan of Pas (Typhon’s 
name on the Whorl, a digitized copy of his personality ruling as a god from mainframe) that 
readers will ever get. The boy and his mother (in this case, serving as both stand-ins for Silk and 
Typhon’s lover, Kypris, who acted from time to time to help her son, even though he was 
                                                                                                                                      
 283 
unaware of their relationship, and also justly representative of the remnants of humanity on the 
Whorl) are sent into the countryside away from their home (the Whorl was sent out from Urth 
with Silk’s embryo and the personality of Kypris aboard). The time has come for it to return 
home (in this reading, its mission is particularly ark-like, preserving the seed of ancient humanity 
from the flood at the coming of the New Sun). However, the mother and child do not make it to 
the home which has been prepared for them (Green, as the inhumi Quetzal directed the lander 
towards when the crew first started to leave the Whorl at the end of The Book of the Long Sun), 
but stop at another house instead (in this case, Blue). When the child goes out to explore on his 
own, he soon becomes lost (as humanity is, even though they have traveled the same path to 
home that they should, they do not know where they are, assuming it to be some far distant 
destination from their ancestral planet of origin.) The old man that the boy meets, who weeps for 
all of those sins, seems to be some fragment of old humanity left behind to wallow in regret and 
remorse. That ancient man represents the inhumi, who not only emulate humanity, but also claim 
to be human, though they have lost something vital that keeps them from being complete on their 
own. The ending of the hero’s story is inconclusive, as it is for The Book of the Short Sun as a 
whole, because the people of Blue may never realize where they actually are, unable to perceive 
a home that is no longer suited to them. Through these embedded stories, Wolfe provides 
complete narrative and thematic closure. There are many other examples in The Book of the 
Short Sun, but this one is especially worth noting for a rather small detail.  
One of the chilling features of this story involves the razor which the mother’s friend 
keeps at the house, which implies that he intends to live there. Mindful of the bird Oreb’s 
ubiquitous plea, “No cut!” that razor strongly suggests sacrifice. This, then, might be the clearest 
sign readers get of Pas’s plan to return to Urth, in sacrificing his son so that he may walk his old 
                                                                                                                                      
 284 
world again (a patera is, after all, actually a broad, shallow dish used for pouring libations, and 
could be filled or emptied easily). Some of Silk’s meteoric rise to prominence within the Whorl 
can easily be justified by his part in the Plan of Pas. However, in the first and last chapter of The 
Book of the Short Sun, we are presented with a very specific effort on the part of the people of 
Blue to bring the gods of mainframe down to their new planet. Hide notes in the very first 
chapter, “Amberjack says that old Prolucutor’s trying to build a Sacred Window” (Wolfe, On 
Blue’s Waters 32). For all its talk of gods, mention of this project will be curiously muted until 
the return of Silk to Viron: “It is – ah – coming … If not in my, er, time, then in my acolyte’s we 
will have a working Window, um, Horn.” … 
“Without Mainframe, no god can come to it, your Cognizance” (Wolfe, Return to the 
Whorl 401). That effort to create a Sacred Window on Blue represents the possibility of Pas 
returning to rule and possess the people as he sees fit. With this rather ambiguous threat looming 
over the planet, Silk decides to leave, taking the Whorl with him, in what might be the final act 
of Typhon’s redemption. 
The final embedded allegory this chapter will present, told by Inclito’s mother in front of 
the protagonist, involves a fierce rivalry for her hand, in which her dead lover Turco gets revenge 
on all of the others who follow him in courting her with a poisoned fang hidden in a pair of 
boots. Her story ends: 
Gioioso had found the boots and worn them when he went hunting. The dried poison 
from the fang had entered his foot slowly until there was enough to stop his heart. Poor 
Solenno had found them too, in the back of the closet that had become his, and had worn 
them when he went to look at my father's muddy field. 
                                                                                                                                      
 285 
It is all simple and reasonable, you will say. I am older than any of you, and it seems to 
me that there is more to be said. Turco had avenged himself, as the strego had warned 
Casco he would. Have you ever seen another person who reminded you of yourself? ... 
We never do, you see. I have been told many times that such-and-such a woman looks 
exactly like me. And I have visited her and spoken to her, and come away feeling that no 
one could resemble me less. So it was with Turco. To my mother and me, Gioioso and 
Solenno seemed very like Turco. But to Turco himself they resembled Casco. Like 
Casco, they were rivals for my hand. And they wore boots of the same size, after all." 
(Wolfe, In Green’s Jungles 56-7) 
Even this story resonates thematically with the greater conflict in the backdrop of The Book of 
the Short Sun, with the bloody struggle between the serpentine inhumi, the Vanished People, and 
the remnants of humanity who have escaped the Whorl. When they look at one another, they see 
only rivalry, but in reality, in a truer light, they are all branches of the same species, who desire 
the same transcendence. This only becomes clear through mapping a smaller story onto the 
greater one directly. 
 After years of reading and rereading Wolfe’s fictions, the structural, allegorical patterns 
which emerge eventually become more self-evident. Unfortunately, the initial allegorical 
understanding requires an intuitive leap that most readers seem unwilling to accept as valid and 
are reluctant to embrace without copious and extended explanation. In the novel Home Fires, 
Wolfe includes a strange voodoo ritual in which the protagonist Chelle chooses a gun to suit her. 
The features of each gun correspond to the people attempting to influence her life, and rather 
than choosing the black and white handled gun which resonates with her husband, she selects an 
officer’s gun (though she served as an enlisted member of the military, portions of her body were 
                                                                                                                                      
 286 
repaired with the officer Jane Simm’s remains after an explosion – this highlights the spectral 
influence that officer has on the rest of her decisions in the text.) In A Borrowed Man, even more 
absurdly, a scene in which a strange figure named Chick gives the narrator three sandwiches 
after pouring Swan-n-Sweetheart brandy into hot chocolate ties together some narrative elements 
and symbols (which include a deceased man named Cob Coldbrook and his fiancée – a cob is of 
course a young swan; furthermore, the narrator will encounter three “reclones” of an unpopular 
poet, his ex-wife, over the course of the novel, before leaving one of them with Cob’s sister. The 
three sandwiches become metonymies for the otherwise inexplicably recloned woman.)  
 After this whirlwind look at some of the features of Wolfe’s fiction, it is possible to assert 
that a particular reading method can be fruitfully employed to recreate missing narrative closure 
in Gene Wolfe’s fiction: rereading the text for structural patterns and resonance can reveal what 
no longer makes narrative sense (such as the three years missing in “The Changeling” or the 
pervasive story of Goldwurm and Ambrosius in The Sorcerer’s House, which never seemed to 
mean much within the text itself.) Next, paying special attention to religious themes and 
symbols, especially Catholic sacraments, often also highlight missing narrative elements (such as 
the arrest of Nadan and his probable execution on Holy Thursday and Good Friday in “Seven 
American Nights” or the transubstantiation of the eucharist in The Book of the Short Sun, which 
signified a transition between flesh and vegetable matter, a communion through consumption 
heavily implied by the treatment of the foliage throughout the text.) Finally, seeking narrative 
closure in allegorical embedded stories, while it requires intuition, allows seemingly unfinished 
narrative strains to be fully realized (as in The Book of the Short Sun, in which a red leech and a 
green frog describe the fate of the solar system.) Wolfe writes with a unity that belies the 
impression of critics who believe that his symbolism never resolves and that his themes support a 
                                                                                                                                      
 287 
multiplicity of irreconcilable world views. While he is not a writer of propaganda or simple texts, 
his spiritual and historical allusions create a framework for his fiction that situates it firmly in an 
existing tradition that, whether we believe it is or not, Wolfe treats as objective reality. 
  
                                                                                                                                      
 288 
Chapter Seven: ‘Tis Vain, O Youth, To Fly the Call of Apollo – A Brief 
Conclusion 
 The majority of this dissertation has focused on a highly idiosyncratic author and some 
reading strategies which, I hope, are aimed at unearthing intentionality in theme and plot in Gene 
Wolfe’s fiction. The largest distinction between subjective reception and objective features of the 
text involve what can be fruitfully argued about: anyone could argue that Able in A Wizard 
Knight is an exceedingly flawed protagonist or that Wolfe’s treatment of women in that work 
seems to fall into a dichotomy between mother and temptress, but Wolfe is fairly unique in that 
objective features of his narrative such as setting and time period might also be up for debate. 
The Wizard Knight certainly indicates that much of the action is set within the borders of Celidon 
in Mythgarthr, though my argument hinges upon its real setting as the womb or dream of Able’s 
mother. It is not controversial to assert that Faulkner knew if one of his stories was set in 
Yoknapatawpha County or not; setting is an objective feature of the text which Wolfe either 
specifically planned out or did not. However, it is entirely possible that a reader will 
misapprehend features such as the narrator’s identity, the chronological sequence of events, or 
the actual cosmology in a Gene Wolfe story; this dissertation claims that all of these heavily 
genre-dependent aspects of his fiction are put in place by Wolfe before his structure is effaced 
from the final draft. This engineering is not a typical writing process, and it is necessary to 
qualify all of this analysis with the possibly obvious warning that this approach works for Gene 
Wolfe in particular and not for any other creative author. 
However, Gene Wolfe is not the only writer in the history of literature who has a 
penchant for puzzles and games. In that regard, he is perhaps most similar to Vladimir Nabokov. 
While there is not space to analyze Nabokov’s complex fiction at the great length it deserves in 
                                                                                                                                      
 289 
relationship to Wolfe’s own oeuvre, it is possible to discuss structural features of at least one of 
his stories and the consensus opinion of its “meaning” derived from his own extra-textual 
statements. Indeed, the most common criticism of his short story “The Vane Sisters” actually 
involves Nabokov’s tendency to a cleverness bordering on vanity, as it operates on what might 
be called a textual gimmick. 
The story begins from the point of view of a professor of French Literature, who notices a 
formation of ice that draws him to a seemingly chance meeting with an ex-coworker. This man, 
known only as D., lets the narrator know that the elder Vane sister of the title, Cynthia, has 
passed away from some heart problem. The narrator originally becomes involved with the sisters 
when her younger sibling, Sybil, appends a suicide note to the bottom of a final exam in his 
class, distraught over the loss of her married lover, D. By the time the narrator reads the 
scribbled note and contacts Sybil’s sister, Sybil is already dead. The second act of the story 
chronicles this professor’s unlikely relationship with Cynthia, in which his pragmatism and 
attention to detail clash with her spiritualism and fascination with the realms of the dead and 
mystical séances. 
 Nabokov’s situational irony springs to life effectively in this story because the narrator 
actually believes he is an excellent observer of the world. After encountering the precipitating 
icicles, he proclaims, “I walked on in a state of raw awareness that seemed to transform the 
whole of my being into one big eyeball rolling in the world’s socket” (Nabokov, “The Vane 
Sisters” 790). The most sublime aspect of the story involves the séance he attends, in which the 
spirits of literary figures such as Oscar Wilde and Tolstoy appear, amidst other figures. One 
would assume that a professor of literature would be astute enough to understand what is 
occurring when “Oscar Wilde came in and in rapid garbled French, with the usual anglicisms, 
                                                                                                                                      
 290 
obscurely accused Cynthia’s dead parents of what appeared in my jottings as ‘plagiatisme.’” In 
this case, a French Literature professor is woefully unaware of the connotation of Wilde’s 
accusations of plagiarism; the plot in which he is embroiled with the Vane Sisters, names and all, 
is cribbed from an Oscar Wilde novel. As David Eggenschwiler notes in “Nabokov’s ‘The Vane 
Sisters’: Exuberant Pedantry and a Biter Bit,” the multiple allusions to history, literature, and to 
seemingly inane details are lost on the narrator, but they can still be appreciated by readers. 
Eggenschwiler writes: 
At the beginning of the story the reader is betrayed, misled about the character of the 
narrator and seduced into affection and admiration, which lessen as he reads father. As 
the imposing speaker tells of his meanderings one Sunday, we must find him clever, 
imaginative, lyrical, fanciful, and sensuously attentive. But when he tells of the two Vane 
sisters and his relations with them, we gradually find him to be less than we first had 
cause to expect. (33) 
Fittingly, Nabokov chooses to reveal the narrator’s ignorance through literary allusions that this 
arrogant literature professor remains woefully blind towards. Oscar Wilde’s accusation is, of 
course, referring to the name of the younger sister, Sybil, culled from The Picture of Dorian 
Gray. That Sybil, too, kills herself over a man whose name starts with a D., just as this Sybil 
decides, “Death was not better than D minus, but definitely better than Life minus D” (Nabokov, 
“The Vane Sisters” 792). That ironic distance between Nabokov’s design element and the 
perceptions of the narrator allows readers to see how thoroughly their first-person lens into the 
events of the story fails to apprehend his direct experiences. This does not preclude the 
possibility that those outside the narrator’s frame of reference actually might understand more 
                                                                                                                                      
 291 
completely, just as is the case with many of the stories of Gene Wolfe presented in previous 
chapters. 
 Ultimately, “The Vane Sisters” is famous for its “trick” last paragraph. While much is 
made of Cynthia’s preoccupation with the afterlife and her ideas of “intervening auras” as well 
as her certainty that her sister is not pleased with her beyond the borders of death, the narrator 
remains aloof and condescending: “Cynthia was above generalities as she was beyond logic” 
(794). At one point, they begin discussing her interest in acrostics and coded messages, and the 
narrator notes, “I wish I could recollect that novel or short story (by some contemporary writer, I 
believe) in which, unknown to its author, the first letters of the words in its last paragraph 
formed, as deciphered by Cynthia, a message from his dead mother” (795). When the final 
paragraph of the narrator’s own assessment of the Vane Sisters closes, employing that trick 
infamously reveals “Icicles by Cynthia, meter from me, Sybil.” The very dripping icicles which 
directed the narrator’s attention at the very start of the story, whose notice he attributed to his 
own keen senses, were set up by an external force of which he had no understanding, far beyond 
the parameters of his logic and reason. 
 While this transforms the story itself into something of a supernatural tale in which the 
seances and spiritual aspects are more or less “real,” the overall effect binds author and reader in 
a sophisticated alliance beyond the materialist assumptions and overconfidence of the narrator: 
deciphering the story becomes a shared game featuring a structural textual puzzle. Readers 
oblivious to Nabokov’s allusions and metatextual suggestions still experience the conflicting 
themes of the story as the narrator mocks Cynthia, even as he is dragged from one spiritual 
investigation to another at her whim. By the end, he is losing sleep actively looking for signs of 
Cynthia trying to reach him, while the Vane Sisters have been directing his actions all along. 
                                                                                                                                      
 292 
 In an era in which examples of pure metafiction are quite common, it is worth discussing 
the nature of Nabokov’s text. While Kenneth Kupsch acknowledges the artistic integrity of the 
story despite some of the criticisms of coldness, over-cleverness, and vapidity thrown at it in 
“The Extra-ordinary Art of ‘The Vane Sisters,’” he comes close to ignoring the suspension of 
disbelief necessary for this type of explicitly genre fiction to maintain its immersive and 
ultimately ironic power. Kupsch highlights some of the responses to the story: 
In particular, it is in reaction to the now-famous ending, with its elaborate acrostic 
message hidden in the final paragraph, that one finds the most skeptical reaction to 
Nabokov’s art being exhibited. Yet it is precisely in that, for some, too-precious ending 
where the thoughtful and sensitive reader shall discover the objectives of more 
conventional storytelling not only being matched, but also being demonstrated as 
strikingly inferior by comparison. (300-1) 
Whether this is hyperbole or not, Kupsch comes close to dismissing the reality of the 
supernatural in the tale, probably from a lifetime of digesting mimetic and realistic fiction, when 
he seems surprised that the metaphysical nature of the story does not raise the objections its 
artistic features do. Kupsch makes some pragmatic and materialist assumptions that echo the 
narrator of the story and his attitudes toward the artificiality of his spiritual experiences: “Yet it 
is precisely the sort of skepticism toward the lucubrations of Cynthia and her clan that the 
intelligent reader must necessarily share with the story narrator, whether we choose to like him 
personally or not, which will prove ‘The Vane Sisters’ such a powerful and original piece of 
storytelling in the end” (306). Kupsch argues that the most logical explanation for the acrostic “is 
that the narrator knowingly placed it there himself. Certainly this is easier to explain than that 
Cynthia, of all people, should have been among the first phantoms to realize that to send a 
                                                                                                                                      
 293 
message successfully one might actually have to make it distinguishable from the world of 
everyday” (307). It seems that Kupsch shares the world view the author is indirectly mocking 
with his ironic distance from the narrator’s self-confidence, while Nabokov’s text actually revels 
in an existence completely free from its professor’s preconceptions. The sisters are not interested 
purely in sending a message to the narrator, but in manipulating events so that they are 
remembered. After their attention-grabbing diversion, our narrator will discover the fate of 
Cynthia and become fascinated once again by the nature of their relationship. Kupsch’s position 
willfully ignores the situational irony, which Nabokov creates through having such a careful and 
educated “eye” miss what is obviously right in front of him. Seriously entertaining the idea that 
the narrator plants the acrostic in his writing ignores the parameters of the game Nabokov 
establishes and the genre of the story: fictions and representations are ultimately imitations 
bordering on invention, but they are not bound by the rules of reality. No one would think to 
question that Horatio and his friends encounter something on the battlements that certainly 
resembles the ghost of Hamlet the elder. Fiction is not bound by Kupsch’s materialist, 
reductionist approach.  
  According to J. Morris in “The Gliding Eye: Nabokov’s Marvelous Terror,” human 
consciousness truly interested Nabokov: 
Nabokovian fiction can be seen as an attempt to investigate and mimic in prose the 
gliding movements of human consciousness, our strange and glorious knack for 
satisfying curiosity about others by inhabiting them imaginatively. “[T]he soul is but a 
manner of being – not a constant state,” says the narrator of The Real Life of Sebastian 
Knight: “Any soul may be yours, if you find and follow its undulations.” … He rejected 
‘realism’ in the old-fashioned sense – the author’s implicit pact with the reader to render 
                                                                                                                                      
 294 
both invisible – in favor of a kind of collegial acknowledgement of the artifices of fiction. 
He did this, I think, for a sound and simple reason: ‘realism’ is, for Nabokov, deeply 
unrealistic. It ignores the conscious and self-conscious presence of the gliding I, the one 
who perceives, imagines, and ultimately creates reality. Nabokov wanted to help good 
readers participate in that “Marvel … that sudden window singing open on a sunlit 
landscape amidst the night of non being.” (Morris 163-4) 
“The Vane Sisters” is preoccupied with death. Morris claims that, for Nabokov, death “provides 
the only passport with which our type of time-bound consciousness can travel to meet the creator 
— though we may glimpse his or her patterns throughout our lives. This idea accounts for the 
rather gnostic linking of mortality with ultimate revelation that haunts Nabokov’s work” (167). 
Indeed, he even claims: “Godlike authorial interventions, along with ingenious techniques to take 
readers up and out of the text, are one way Nabokov played out his forays beyond 
consciousness” (168). Once again, the presence of the acrostic is still widely accepted as a de 
rigueur and valid aspect of the text because Nabokov himself emphasized it to get the story 
published: 
In his famous letter to Katharine A. White, the chief editor of The New Yorker, while 
explaining the intricate riddle-like structure of "The Vane Sisters," which had been 
rejected by the magazine, Nabokov mentioned that some of his stories written in the past 
had been composed according to the same system "wherein a second (main) story is 
woven into, or placed behind, the superficial semitransparent one." As an example, he 
named another story with such an "inside"--"Signs and Symbols," which had been 
published in The New Yorker. 
                                                                                                                                      
 295 
Thanks to Nabokov's explanations, the "inner scheme" of "The Vane Sisters" has become 
a common property. It is a story of the intervention by gentle spirits (or ghosts) into the 
reality of the narrator, "a callous observer of the superficial planes of life," crowned by 
the secret message in the finale that can be decoded by the rules of acrostic reading. To 
quote the letter to Katherine A. White again, "everything in the tale leads to one 
recurving end, or rather forms a delicate circle, a system of mute responses, not realized 
by the Frenchman but directed by some unknown spirit at readers.” (Dolinin) 
Clearly, Nabokov writes palimpsests much as I argue that Wolfe does, and, by and large, the 
extratextual assertions Nabokov made about the story’s subtext are considered to be objective 
features of the text. 
 However, not every author who might be said to write puzzling (if not “puzzle box”) 
fiction has the same commitment to the ability of underlying structure to create meaning. 
Generally considered to be one of the transitional figures between modern and postmodern 
literary occupations, Samuel Beckett is another unique literary figure who flirts with the 
enigmatic and the allusive. In Twentieth Century Interpretations of Molloy, Malone Dies, The 
Unnamable, J.D. O’Hara talks about the possibility of readers knowing more than the narrators 
through which they experience the fictional world: 
In a much-noted passage in Tom Jones, the narrator solemnly assures us that he has been 
unable to discover what, at one point, Tom ate for dinner. The remark’s humor is based 
on our assumption that narrators are omniscient, at least in the sense that authors invent 
their stories and therefore can never be at a loss to know what happens in them. Of course 
novelists have frequently taken on themselves the task of communicating ideas through 
ignorant narrators, as in Huckleberry Finn, Ulysses, and “The Secret Sharer.” Their 
                                                                                                                                      
 296 
method has been to put the character’s perceptions in a context – of the work or life – that 
will contradict, modify, or supplement his limited point of view. Huck Finn approves of 
slavery, but we don’t; Twain relies on our morality to correct Huck’s. In Ulysses, Bloom 
at a Catholic mass watches communion … and Joyce relies on our knowledge of the mass 
to correct Bloom’s misinterpretation of the priest’s gesture. … 
Beckett too uses this device of the ignorant narrator, of course. … But for the most part 
we may say that Beckett has removed the omniscient narrator and replaced him with an 
ignorant but uncorrectable narrating hero. (7) 
O’Hara goes on to categorize Beckett as someone who creates a narrative voice born of 
ignorance of which no greater knowledge can be attained: 
But the world of a first-person narrative, like our own individual worlds, is necessarily 
solipsistic; nothing exists in it until perceived. … Now the thinking and perceiving mind, 
faulty though it is, is all in all. Its world is therefore like itself, faulty and incomplete, but 
Beckett makes no effort to improve and complete it. If we cannot do so ourselves, if the 
narrator’s limitations are our own, then we are forced not merely to notice his ignorance 
as we notice Huck’s or Bloom’s, but to admit our own ignorance as well. (8) 
O’Hara sees this as a symptom of modernity and its preoccupations, with the breakdown of 
certainties and faith, in which perception undergoes constant reversals and difficulties. O’Hara 
also includes an interview which Beckett gave to Israel Shenker, actually essential to defining 
the exact difference between the truly open and decentered texts of postmodernism and the 
rigorous, convoluted, but soluble labyrinths begging for gnosis that I insist are the most apt 
metaphor for categorizing Wolfe’s work: 
                                                                                                                                      
 297 
The kind of work I do is one in which I’m not master of my material. The more Joyce 
knew the more he could. I’m working with impotence, ignorance. I don’t think ignorance 
has been exploited in the past. There seems to be a kind of esthetic axiom that expression 
is achievement – must be an achievement. My little exploration is that whole zone of 
being that has always been set aside by artists as something unuseable – as something by 
definition incompatible with art.  
I think that anyone nowadays, who pays the slightest attention to his own experience 
finds it the experience of a non-knower, a non-can-er. The other type of artist – the 
Apollonian – is absolutely foreign to me. (8) 
Here, a name is finally given to the self-conscious engineer of controlled structure, thanks to 
Beckett (who, through omission, identifies himself as a Dionysian artist). This dissertation 
attempts to prove the idea that Wolfe is a purely Apollonian artist due to his personal beliefs and 
the manner in which he immanentizes the religious, historical, and literary features of his work. 
It is only fitting that Beckett himself implies a binary structural juxtaposition to describe himself 
against other artists.18 However, not everyone accepts that humanity must always occupy an 
existence of not-knowing and incapability, and the Apollonian artist of order might even prove 
capable of transmitting his or her own certainties behind the vagaries of language even as he or 
she embraces them. Lack of confidence in one’s mastery is hardly a platform to pronounce 
                                                      
18 The other possibility is that Beckett is himself being intentionally ironic and obtuse here, and 
that he actually knows what, for example, the “ontologically unknowable” Unnamable of the 
third book of his Dionysian-themed trilogy actually is in Apollonian fashion, with its rounded 
head and single eye leaking forever, occasionally replaced with other aspects of itself, Mahood 
and the Worm, even as it is beaten incessantly to the point of regurgitation in the darkness. 
However, I couldn’t possibly name my own suspicions in polite company. 
                                                                                                                                      
 298 
totalitarian statements about the rest of humankind and the manner in which it perceives the 
universe. 
 Of course, much of the subtext of this dissertation hints that the intention of an artist can 
be grasped. However, there are several avant-garde developments in literature and other media 
over the course of the last two centuries that truly do complicate that kind of assertion. In 
particular, the composition strategy of William S. Burroughs might be said to reveal the illusory 
nature of intentionality: his cut-up and folding methods involved taking random patterns from 
different texts and combining them. Of course, one of his starting principles was that language 
itself was a totalizing system that inherently denied its users the ability to express themselves in 
unique ways. His technique was designed to free creators from the tyranny of linguistic systems, 
and, in its own way, produce a kind of truth. 
 While Burroughs’ subconscious choices and the rigid framework used to create the cut-
ups may not have been purely random, the design choices he made ensured that any extended 
theme or meaning in the work would be the product of accident: his intentional architecture 
robbed his structures of cohesion. While analysis of his texts is certainly possible, allowing 
random fluctuations from many different sources and from other creative founts intentionally 
works against the unity of a work. In other words, the compositional style of each author should 
be considered in assessing the nature of their texts and what kind of analyses might be most 
fruitful. The failure of some critics to engage with the themes of Wolfe’s work stem from a 
misunderstanding of his artistic priorities, which are, in the final analysis, purely Apollonian. 
  
                                                                                                                                      
 299 
 Works Cited 
Andre-Driussi, Michael, Nick Gevers and James Jordan. “Some Moments with the Magus: An 
Interview with Gene Wolfe.” Infinity.co.uk. 2003. Web. 2 Dec 2017. < 
http://www.infinityplus.co.uk/nonfiction/intgw.htm> 
Andre-Driussi, Michael. The Wizard Knight Companion. San Francisco: Sirius Fiction, Print. 
2009. 
Aramini, Marc. Between Light and Shadow. Finland: Castalia House Press, 2015.  
Armstrong, Philip. “Hi, We’re Alzabo Soup.” Reddit. 28 Jul, 2018. Web. 28 Dec 2018. 
https://www.reddit.com/r/genewolfe/comments/92n5gs/hi_were_alzabo_soup_the_podca
st_where_we/ 
Ashliman, D.L. “The Three Billy Goats Gruff.” Folktales. 2000. Web. 17 Feb 2018. 
https://www.pitt.edu/~dash/type0122e.html 
Saint Augustine. Enchiridion: On Faith, Faith, Hope, and Love, trans. Albert C. Outler. 
Tertulian.org. 1955. Web. 6 Mar 2019. 
http://www.tertullian.org/fathers/augustine_enchiridion_02_trans.htm#C26 
Borski, Robert. “The Fifth Head of Cerberus Reviewed,” Ultan’s Library. 28 Aug 2001. Web. 
14 Mar 2019. https://ultan.org.uk/review-fifth-head-of-cerberus/ 
Borski, Robert. The Long and the Short of It. New York: IUniverse, Inc. 2006. Print. 
Boyce, Mary. “Ahura Mazda.” Encyclopaedia Iranica. New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
Print. 1983. Print. 
Bresciani, Edda. “Sobek, Lord of the Land of the Lake.” Divine Creatures: Animal Mummies in 
Ancient Egypt. Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press, 2005. Print. 199-206. 
                                                                                                                                      
 300 
Christopher, Joe R. “A Second View of Castleview.” Quondam et Futurus 3 (Fall 1993). 66-76. 
Print. 
Clute, John. “Gene Wolfe.” Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. 2018. Web. 12 Jan 2019. 
Crampton, Jeremy. “Some Greek Themes in Wolfe’s Latro Novels.” Ultan’s Library. 10 Aug 
2000. Web. 17 Feb 2019. https://ultan.org.uk/some-greek-themes-in-latro/ 
Crookall, Martin. “A Lycanthrope in Wolfe’s Clothing: Gene Wolfe’s Castleview.” Martin 
Crookall – Author for Sale. 12 Feb 2018. Web. 17 Feb 2019 
https://mbc1955.wordpress.com/2018/02/12/a-lycanthrope-in-wolfes-clothing-gene-
wolfes-castleview/ 
Crown, Ron. “The Changeling in Orbit.” Urth Mailing List. 15 Jul 1997. Web. 7 May 2017. 
http://www.urth.net/urth/archives/v0002/0164.shtml 
Davis, F. Hadland. Myths and Legends of Japan. Mineola: Dover Publications, 1992. Print. 
Delany, Samuel R. The Jewel Hinged Jaw: Notes on the Language of Science Fiction. 
Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 2009. Print. 
De Man, Paul. “The Resistance to Theory.” Theory and History of Literature (33). Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press. Print. 3-20 
Derrida, Jacques. Of Grammatology, Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, trans. John Hopkins 
University Press, Print. 1998. 
Dolinin, Alexander. “The Signs and Symbols in Nabokov’s Signs and Symbols.” Zembla. Nd. 
Web. 15 Mar 2019. https://www.libraries.psu.edu/nabokov/dolinin.htm 
Eggenschwiler, David. “Nabokov’s ‘The Vane Sisters’: Exuberant Pedantry and a Biter Bit.” 
Studies in Short Fiction 18.1 (1981): 33-9. Print.  
                                                                                                                                      
 301 
Ewing, Murray. “The Secret to Reading Gene Wolfe.” Mewsings. 11 Sep 2010. Web. 17 Feb 
2019. https://www.murrayewing.co.uk/mewsings/2010/09/11/the-secret-to-reading-gene-
wolfe/ 
Farrell, John. The Varieties of Authorial Intention: Literary Theory Beyond the Intentional 
Fallacy. Cham: Palgrave Macmillan US, 2017. Print. 
Frazier, Robert. “The Legerdemain of the Wolfe.” Shadows of the New Sun: Wolfe on 
Writing/Writers on Wolfe, ed. Peter Wright. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2007. 
Print. 44-55. 
Frug, Stephen Saperstein. “The Writer as Werewolf: Mixed Thoughts on a Wizard Knight.” 
Attempts. 13 Sep 2007. Web. 18 Feb 2019. 
<http://stephenfrug.blogspot.com/2007/09/writer-as-werwolf-mixed-thoughts-on.html> 
Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1957. Print. 
Gevers, Nicholas David. A Study of the Major Science Fiction Works of Gene Wolfe. Cape 
Town: University of Cape Town, 1991. Print. 
Gillespie, Bruce. “Gene Wolfe’s Sleight of Hand.” The Australian Science Fiction Review, 
March 1986.  
Gordon, Joan. Gene Wolfe. Cabin John: Wildside Press, 1986. Print. 
Graves, Robert. The Greek Myths. New York: Penguin Books, 2012. Kindle ed. 
Herodotus. The Histories, trans. Robin Waterfield. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998. Print. 
Ibsen, Henrik. Peer Gynt, trans. William and Charles Archer. Scotts Valley: CreateSpace 
Independent Publishing Platform, 2015. Print. 
Iser, Wolfgang. “The Reading Process: A Phenomenological Approach,” New Literary 
History, Vol. 3, No. 2, On Interpretation: I (Winter, 1972), 298. 
                                                                                                                                      
 302 
Ivanits, Linda J. Russian Folk Belief. Abingdon: Routledge, 1989. Print. 
Jordan, James B. “Gene Wolfe Interview.” Shadows of the New Sun: Wolfe on Writing/Writers 
on Wolfe, ed. Peter Wright. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2007. Print. 101-131. 
Jordan, James. “The Changeling.” Urth Mailing List. 17 Jul 1997. Web. 7 May 2017. 
http://www.urth.net/urth/archives/v0002/0165.shtml 
Jordan, James. “The Changeling.” Urth Mailing List.  22 Jul 1997. Web. 7 May 2017. 
http://www.urth.net/urth/archives/v0003/0179.shtml 
Jung, Carl G, M.-L. von Franz, Joseph L. Henderson, Jolande Jacobi, and Aniela Jaffre. Man and 
His Symbols. New York: Dell, 1964. Kindle Edition. 
Jung, Carl G. The Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious. London: Routledge, 1996. Print. 
Kalif, Anders, and Terje Oestigaard. Cremation, Corpses, and Cannibalism: Comparative 
Cosmologies and Centuries of Cosmic Consumption. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing, 2017. Print.  
Kipling, Rudyard. “A Song of Travel.” Poetry Lovers Page. 2013. Web. 9 July 2016. 
http://www.poetryloverspage.com/poets/kipling/song_of_travel.html 
Kendall, Paul. “Willow.” Trees for Life. 2017. Web. 18 Feb 2019. 
https://treesforlife.org.uk/forest/mythology-folklore/willow/ 
Klimczak, Natalia. “She Brings Bad News: The Scary Slavic Household Spirit Called 
Kikimora.” Ancient Origins. 7 Oct 2016. Web. 20 May 2018. 
Kristeva, Julia. The Kristeva Reader, ed. Toril Moi. New York City: Columbia University Press, 
1986. Print.  
Kupsch, Kenneth. “The Extra-ordinary Art of ‘The Vane Sisters.’” Midwest Quarterly 51:3 
(March 2010). 300-311. Print. 
                                                                                                                                      
 303 
Lackey, Roy C. “City on Green.” Urth Mailing List. 31 Dec 2010. Web. 2 Dec 2017. 
http://lists.urth.net/pipermail/urth-urth.net/2010-December/016270.html 
McCalmont, Jonathan. “The Shadow of the Torturer: The Eye of Art Turned Inward.” Ruthless 
Culture. 19 Mar 2010. Web. 2 Dec 2017. <https://ruthlessculture.com/2010/03/19/the-
shadow-of-the-torturer-1980-the-eye-of-art-turned-inwards/> 
Montazzoli, Paul. “Introduction.” Don Quixote de la Mancha. New York: Barnes and Noble 
Books, 1995. Print. 
Morris, J. “The Gliding Eye: Nabokov’s Marvelous Terror.” Southern Review (Winter 1999). 
163-174. Print. 
Morier, James Justin. The Adventures of Haji Baba of Ispahan. Adelaide: University of 
Adelaide. 17 Dec 2014. Web. 11 Mar 2019. 
https://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/m/morier/james/adventures-of-hajji-baba-of-
ispahan/complete.html 
Nabokov, Vladimir. “The Vane Sisters.” Norton Anthology of World Literature, Volume F. 
Fourth Edition. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2018. Print. 790-799. 
Newton, K.M. “Performing Literary Interpretation.” Literary Theory and Criticism: An Oxford 
Guide, Ed. Patricia Waugh. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006. 475-486. 
Ogden, Daniel. Drakon: Dragon Myth and Serpent Cult in the Greek and Roman Worlds. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013. Print. 
Pirkola, Robert.“The Changeling.” Urth Mailing List. 18 Jul 2014. Web. 7 May 2017. 
http://lists.urth.net/pipermail/urth-urth.net/2014-July/054923.html 
Powers, Tim. “Introduction.” The Sorcerer’s House. Hornsea: PS Publishing, 2010. Print. 
                                                                                                                                      
 304 
Quinion, Michael. “Oaf.” Word Wide Words. 1996. Web. 7 May 2017. 
http://www.worldwidewords.org/weirdwords/ww-oaf1.htm 
Roberts, Adam. Palgrave History of Science Fiction, 2nd Edition. London: Palgrave McMillan, 
2016. Print. 
Schrader, Helena. “Nothing in Excess, or Ares Chained.” Sparta Reconsidered. 14 Jul 2012. 
Web. 18 Feb 2019. http://spartareconsidered.blogspot.com/2012/07/nothing-in-excess-or-
ares-chained.html 
Shakespeare, William. “The Second Part of Henry IV.” The Complete Works of William 
Shakespeare 1993. Web. 25 Jun 2018. 
http://shakespeare.mit.edu/2henryiv/2henryiv.2.1.html 
“The Nativity of Our Lord Jesus Christ from the Roman Martyrology.” The United States 
Conference of Catholic Bishops. 2017. Web. 4 Apr 2017. http://www.usccb.org/prayer-
and-worship/liturgical-year/christmas/christmas-proclamation.cfm 
“Trip, Trap.” Wolfewiki. 23 Dec 2010. Web. 17 Feb 2019. 
https://www.wolfewiki.com/pmwiki/pmwiki.php?n=Stories.TripTrap 
van der Berg, Klaus. “Peer Gynt (A Review).” Theatre Journal (58:4). Jan 2006, 684-687. Print. 
Watt, Ian. The Rise of the Novel. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001. Print. 
Whatling, Stuart. “Medieval ‘Mise-en-abyme’: The Object Depicted within Itself” 
Courtald.ac.uk. 16 Feb 2009. Web. 15 Mar 2019. 
http://www.courtauld.ac.uk/researchforum/projects/medievalarttheory/documents/Mise-
en-abyme.pdf 
Wright, Peter. Attending Daedalus: Gene Wolfe, Artifice, and the Reader. Liverpool: Liverpool 
University Press, 2003. Print. 
                                                                                                                                      
 305 
Wright, Peter. “Confounding the Skin and the Mask: Gene Wolfe’s The Fifth Head of Cerberus 
and the Politics of Ambiguity.” Ultan’s Library. 15 Jan 2002. Web. 17 Mar 2019. 
https://ultan.org.uk/confounding-the-skin-and-the-mask/ 
Wolfe, Gene. Castleview. New York City: Tor Books, 1990. Print 
Wolfe, Gene. Endangered Species. New York: Tor Books, 2003. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. Free Live Free. New York: Tor Books, 1986. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. In Green’s Jungles. New York: Tor Books, 2000. Print.  
Wolfe, Gene. Latro in the Mist. New York: Tor Books, 2003. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. On Blue’s Waters. New York: Tor Books, 1999. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. Peace. New York: Orb Books, 2012. 
Wolfe, Gene. Personal Correspondence, 5 Apr. 2012.  
Wolfe, Gene. Return to the Whorl. New York: Tor Books, 2001. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. Shadow and Claw. New York: Orb, 1994. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. Sword and Citadel. New York: Orb, 1994. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. The Castle of the Otter. Willimantic: Ziesing Brothers, 1982. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. “The Changeling.” Book of Days. London: Arrow Books, 1985. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. The Fifth Head of Cerberus. New York: Orb Books, 1972. Print.  
Wolfe, Gene. The Knight. New York: Tor Books, 2004. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. The Sorcerer’s House. New York: Tor Books, 2010. Print.  
 
Wolfe, Gene. The Urth of the New Sun. New York: Orb, 1997. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. The Wizard. New York: Tor Books, 2004. Print. 
Wolfe, Gene. “Trip, Trap.” Storeys from the Old Hotel. New York: Tor Books, 1988. Print. 238-
264. 
                                                                                                                                      
 306 
MARC ARAMINI 
7854 N Pebble Dr 
Kingman, AZ 86401 
702-355-2125 
marcaramini@gmail.com 
 
EDUCATION 
PhD, English, University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV)   May 2019 
 
 Dissertation: “Does It Mean? Gene Wolfe, Perverse Puzzle-Maker” 
 Committee: Felicia Campbell (chair), Gary Totten, Vincent Perez, Satish Bhatnagar 
 
MA, English, Northern Arizona University      2002 
 
BS, Biochemistry, University of Notre Dame    2000 
 
HONORS AND AW ARDS 
Nominee, Hugo Award for Best Related Work     2016 
Outstanding Graduate Teacher, Northern Arizona University  2002 
 
TEACHING EXPERIENCE 
Graduate Teaching Assistant, English, UNLV    2016-present  
   
Courses taught:  
English 101 • Composition I  
 English 102 • Composition II 
English 231S • World Literature for Science Majors 
English 426B • Mythology 
 
Resident Faculty, English, Mohave Community College  2011-2013  
 
Courses taught: 
TRE 089 * Transitional English 
English 101 * Basic Composition 
English 102 * Literature and Composition 
 
Instructor/Tutor, Huntington Learning Center    2010-2011  
 
Associate Faculty, English, Mohave Community College   2002-2003 
 
Courses taught:  
English 101 * Basic Composition 
English 102 * Literature and Composition 
 
Teacher, Biology & Life Science, Lake Havasu High School  2002-2003 
  
                                                                                                                                      
 307 
Graduate Teaching Assistant, English, Northern Arizona U  2001-2002 
 
Courses taught:  
English 105 * Academic Reading and Writing 
English 205 * Rhetoric and Writing 
 
PUBLICATIONS 
Work-in-Progress 
Behind Sword and Spirit: An Exploration of the Fiction of Gene Wolfe, 2002-2018. Castalia 
House, 2019 (under contract). 
 
Books 
Beyond Time and Memory: An Exploration of the Fiction of Gene Wolfe, 1987-2001. Castalia 
House, 2018 (forthcoming). 
 
Between Light and Shadow: An Exploration of the Fiction of Gene Wolfe, 1951-1986. Castalia 
House, 2015. (Hugo nominee for Best Related Work.) 
 
Articles 
“The Refuge of Art: Piercing the Silence of Death in Nabokov’s ‘Vane Sisters.’” UNLV World 
Literature Essay Series (forthcoming). 
 
“There Will Be Vengeance! Apocalyptic Anger after ‘Ride a Tin Can.’” Feast of Laughter vol. 5, 
2018 (forthcoming). 
  
“Proving Veil’s Hypothesis: Variance Reduction Techniques, Larval Life Cycles on an East 
Wind, and Shadow Children riding Mars(c)hmen in The Fifth Head of Cerberus.” Ultan’s 
Library, 1 Sep 2014. ultan.org.uk/variance-reduction-techniques/. 
 
Reviews 
“H. Peter Steeves’ Beautiful, Bright, and Blinding: Phenomenological Aesthetics and the Life of 
Art.” Popular Culture Review, vol. 29, no. 2, Spring 2018, 155-256. 
 
“Carl Rollyson’s Confessions of a Serial Biographer.” Popular Culture Review, vol. 28, no. 1, 
Spring 2017, 221-223. 
 
Fiction 
“Soldier of Mercy.” Shadows of the New Sun, Tor Books, 2013, 273-288. 
 
INTERVIEWS/MEDIA APPEARANCES 
Special Guest, The Gene Wolfe Literary Podcast, Claytemple Media, 24 June 2019 
(forthcoming). 
 
Special Guest, “The Fifth Head of Cerberus: A Conversation with Marc Aramini.” The Gene 
Wolfe Literary Podcast. Claytemple Media. 29 Oct. 2018. 
https://www.claytemplemedia.com/single-post/2018/10/30/New-Episode-of-The-Gene-
                                                                                                                                      
 308 
Wolfe-Literary-Podcast-The-Fifth-Head-of-Cerberus---A-Conversation-With-Marc-
Aramini 
 
Special Guest, “Operation Ares Wrap Up with Marc Aramini.” The Gene Wolfe Literary Podcast. 
Claytemple Media. 9 Apr. 2018. https://www.claytemplemedia.com/operation-ares 
 
“Author Marc Aramini Talks with Stuart [Starosta] about the Complicated Works of Gene 
Wolfe.” Fantasy Literature: Fantasy & Science Fiction & Audiobook Reviews, Sept. 
2016. www.fantasyliterature.com/author-interviews/marc-aramini/. 
 
“Gene Wolfe for N00bs – An Interview with Marc Aramini.” SF Kittens, 30 May 2016. 
sfkittens.wordpress.com/2016/05/29/gene-wolfe-for-n00bs-an-interview-with-marc-
aramini/. 
 
“Aramini on ‘A Solar Labyrinth.’” Ultan’s Library: A Web Resource for the Study of Gene Wolfe, 
3 Feb 2016. ultan.org.uk/aramini-on-a-solar-labyrinth/. 
 
“Shadows of the New Sun: Marc Aramini.” Ultan’s Library: A Web Resource for the Study of 
Gene Wolfe, 29 May 2013. ultan.org.uk/shadows-of-the-new-sun-an-interview-with-
marc-aramini/. 
 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE & EXPERIENCE 
Technical and Copy Editor, Popular Culture Review (peer-review journal), 2016-present 
 
Program Coordinator, Far West Popular Culture Association/American Culture Association 
Annual Conference, Las Vegas, 24-26 Feb. 2017, 23-25 Feb. 2018, 22-24 Feb. 2019 
 
Lead Faculty Advisor, Phi Theta Kappa Honor Society, Mohave Community College, 2010-2013 
 
PRESENTATIONS 
 
“Becoming a Man in Gene Wolfe’s Wizard Knight.” Far West Popular Culture Association 
Conference, 24 Feb. 2019. 
 
Guest Lecture: “Decadence, Decay, and the American Dream: Gene Wolfe’s ‘Seven American 
Nights.’” UNLV, 12 Sept. 2018.  
 
“Disney, Final Fantasy, and the Mickey Mafia.” Far West Popular Culture Association 
Conference, 25 Feb. 2017. 
 
“Unexamined Faith: Chaucer’s Squire’s Tale.” Rocky Mountain Medieval Renaissance 
Association Conference, May 2002. 
 
REFERENCES 
Dr. Gary Totten, Professor of English and Department Chair, UNLV 
Dr. Felicia Campbell, Professor of English, UNLV 
                                                                                                                                      
 309 
Dr. Vincent Perez, Associate Professor of English, UNLV 
Dr. Jarret Keene, Visiting Assistant Professor of English and World Literature Program 
Coordinator, UNLV 
Dr. John Kitts, Faculty, English, Mohave Community College 
 
 
 