 

 [On Fiction-Writing] Restraint, subtlety, unreliable narrators, and Gene Wolfe | Stuff about a thing 

 Skip to content 

 Stuff about a thing 

 Oh, the ostentation!

 Menu 

 Home 
 About 

 Fleeting Adventures of Insufferable Romance and Excruciating Fantasy 

 Home [On Fiction-Writing] Restraint, subtlety, unreliable narrators, and Gene Wolfe 

 [On Fiction-Writing] Restraint, subtlety, unreliable narrators, and Gene Wolfe

 June 3, 2015 March 2, 2020 Noel 
 Blog blog , book of the new sun , essay , fantasy , fiction , gene wolfe , restraint , review , science fiction , stories , subtlety , surreal , universe , unreliable narrator , writer , writing 

 I remember myself saying once, “The more words you use to convey your story, the less I believe in the world you’ve constructed.” It’s something I still uphold to this day. Narratorial hand-holding has never been my thing. If I want a story, I’d rather discover the finer details on my own, than have to be spoonfed every little thing. If a story feels the need to constantly explain itself with lengthy cutscenes or expository dialogue, it shows how little confidence the story has that you will be able to pick these things up from context clues.

 I recently made a blog post on video games and loneliness, and a common trait of these video games is the fact that they completely skimp out on verbal narration, or on words entirely. They are quiet games that let images and actions dictate the story. I absolutely adore it when I am able to extract so much information from a wordless scene.

 So where does that leave a fiction writer like me? I work with words, so doesn’t that mean more words is always a plus? It ultimately depends on how these words are used.

 Take Gene Wolfe, for example. His masterpiece The Book of the New Sun is a 4-volume tome that is as thick as it is nearly impenetrable. It takes place in the distant future, when the sun has begun to die, a time where unknown, unrecorded, and unexplained calamities have devastated this world to the point that no one remembers what things used to be called or what their uses once were. Hence, we are taken on a massive quest in the guise of a surreal, Gothic fantasy novel, when in fact, it is more science fiction than anything else, and we only get to have an inkling of that upon the 2nd reading of the novel! There is an epic quest in here but instead of laying out the scene in graphic detail, he describes his world in a way that an actual character of this world would describe it: to the best of their knowledge, which is to say, not very much. Space travel is described as light-fishes moving across mirrors; aliens are described like they’re human; strange creatures inhabit this world and yet we only get the barest of descriptions as to their nature. There are hidden Biblical references; tons of obsolete Latin words abound; and things are never as they appear. The world Gene Wolfe has created is hazy and amorphous and lacking in distinct shape. The shapes change after every new chapter you read, after each new interpretation you come across.

 Gene Wolfe once said, “Real people really are unreliable narrators all the time, even if they try to be reliable narrators.” Common sense dictates that it is unwise to trust unreliable narrators but there is always something so alluring about it, something so unquestionably human that a narrator would forgo accuracy to tell the story they want to tell. You can infer so many things about what they decide to talk about, and what they decide to leave out. This is why restraint and subtlety is very important to me when it comes to reading and writing fiction.

 To me, the most interesting stories arise from the untold details. No, I don’t want to listen to your deliberate attempts to flesh out your world. No, don’t tell me histories as if they were written in books. Tell me histories that arise from your psyche. Tell me histories that surface from interaction with your surroundings. Please trust that us readers are intelligent enough to deduce, to theorize. Let me interpret your universe.

 Share this:

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Tumblr 

 Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) 
 Reddit 

 Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 
 Pinterest 

 Like Loading... 

 Related 

 Post navigation

 ← [Blogsperiment #2] Earth-Prisoner Anita Papaano 
 Harry Potter thing → 

 One thought on “ [On Fiction-Writing] Restraint, subtlety, unreliable narrators, and Gene Wolfe ” 

 winawonders says: 

 June 10, 2015 at 2:49 am 

 I agree with you here. I really like seeing how far I can push the “game” that is the story. Writing-wise, how far can I go without actually telling the reader what I mean? Or how can I say more than one thing at once? Hahaha 

 Like Like 

 Reply 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Δ 

 Create a free website or blog at WordPress.com. 

 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 

To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:

 Cookie Policy 

 Comment 

 Reblog 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Stuff about a thing 

 Join 26 other subscribers

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 Stuff about a thing 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 %d 

 Design a site like this with WordPress.com
 Get started 

 