The 1981 BBC Lord of the Rings radio adaptation reviewed. | conradbrunstrom 
 Skip to content 
 Follow: 
 RSS 
 Twitter 
 conradbrunstrom 
 Things I never thunk before. 
 Home 
 About 
 "Silent Majority" 
 2015 
 Aberdeen 
 academic conference 
 Austeriarchy 
 Awards Ceremonies 
 Christmas 
 Dublin Airport 
 eighteenth-century 
 Eurovision 
 France 
 Gay Marriage 
 Georgia 
 Ireland 
 Jonathan Swift 
 London 
 Metrics 
 modernism 
 music 
 Offshoring 
 Parenthood 
 Referendum 
 Richard Nixon 
 sci fi 
 Six Trillion Dollars 
 sountrack 
 Space Exploration 
 Symposium 
 Taxation 
 Uncategorized 
 Universities 
 Tags 1981 , BBC , Radio , Tolkien 
 The 1981 BBC Lord of the Rings radio adaptation reviewed.
 December 5, 2020 
 Obviously I heard this at the time as a teenager. But it’s been decades, and it took a prompt from a friend on Facebook to excavate this experience – the experience of the 1981 BBC radio dramatisation of Lord of the Rings.
 First of all, there is the music by Stephen Oliver – which is magical. Stephen Oliver, uncle to the famous sardonic TV host John Oliver, was cruelly taken from us by the AIDS virus at the stupidly young age of 42. Oliver’s score consists of a main theme dominated by jagged chords which express the sheer effort of questing. It’s a theme expressive of hard fought time and space, something that reminds us that the joy of Tolkien involves descriptions of pages and pages about trudging about in the wilderness feeling cold and miserable. Oliver’s songs are also a joy, as careful and discrete orchestrations underscore the actual voices.
 Brian Sibley, principal adaptor, is a Tolkien scholar of note and is the sort of person who knows everyone of of those “Books of Lost Tales” forwards, backwards and diagonally. His dramatisation keeps as much of Tolkien’s dialogue as possible. There are a few strategic edits. The whole drama begins with the torture of Gollum in Mordor – an event which the book leaves us to dimly imagine. As with the Bakshi and Jackson films, the hobbits escape the Shire straight to Bree, leaving out the detour through the Old Forest, the encounter with Tom Bombadil and the nightmarish Barrow Wights. Otherwise, this version is very faithful. There are a few odd moments. Instead of having the destruction of Isengard reported after the event by Merry and Pippin to Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli – we get a more direct dramatisation of the event which actually precedes the telling of the Battle of Helm’s Deep. What gets lost by this rearrangement is the sheer shock and wonderment experienced by the Helm’s Deep survivors when they see what Isengard has become. In a tiny change, the sceptical Rohirrim warrior who suspects that Gandalf has left Theoden in the lurch is Hama the doorwarden. In the book, Hama is a decent guy throughout, and dies heroically in battle. (Yes, it takes a certain kind of Tolkien fan to spot and object to that.)
 The Battle of the Pelennor Fields is developed cleverly by singing the Rohan lay written in its wake and inserting battle dialogue in between its verses.
 Perhaps the most notable decision made involves indulging the full proportionate pathos of the slow return home following the Destruction of the Ring. The goodbyes are given the full elongated treatment, and by the end of the drama we are left with a heightened sense of the individual tragedy that is Frodo’s. If you are not sobbing at the Grey Havens, you may be impervious to certain forms of drama.
 There is a tendency not to want to work the narrator (Gerard Murphy) too hard, and to attempt to transfer some of the descriptions into dialogue. This strategy must presumably mark all efforts to turn novels into radio dramas? Sam (Bill Nighy) is rather awkwardly forced to narrate the process of his battle with Shelob in real time. In fact, radio drama serves to highlight the fact that Sam is, for two or three chapters, the most profoundly lonely character in the entire epic as Sam is forced to talk to himself for extended periods. It is, of course, a profoundly moving performance. I have some difficulty seeing Nighy’s face while hearing him.
 This being radio, it’s a drama of seasoned voices rather than fresh faces. Certain familiar voices are worth noting. Jack May is King Theoden and since Jack May’s was the voice of Nelson Gabriel, it is hard to imagine a more familiar voice in a BBC radio context. He is a fairly haughty Theoden, whose friendship with Merry never quite rings true. Denethor, who is given rather cursory treatment in the Jackson movies, is given the far more hauntingly querulous voice of Peter Vaughan, who communicates the bitterness and grief of the character as effectively as you’d imagine. The perfectly named Marian Diamond realises Galadriel as a walking song. Stephen Thorne (whom three Doctors fought as Omega) is a suitably slow Treebeard. I have to say that the Nazgul don’t sound all that phantasmagoric, and the orcs don’t sound all that degraded. The orcs sound less like Millwall supporters and more like middle aged Spurs fans. Perhaps this dramatisation is comparatively weak on “evil”. Then there is John le Mesurier as a Bilbo who is perceptibly damaged by long ring ownership – who is exhausted by it and becomes intermittently somewhat nagging and demanding.
 Ian Holm’s performance reminds us that Frodo was, after all, the eldest of the four hobbits. He’s in early middle age and demonstrates far more maturity certainly than Merry or Pippin. He becomes somewhat petulant by the time he reaches Mordor, and the snappish quality with which he treats Sam makes his final inability to cast aside the ring seem all the more plausible. Best of all is Holm’s Frodo when tired and wounded. Sorrowful resignation is a mood that Holm can accommodate with some confidence. This is a hobbit who has been hollowed out by unspeakable heaviness. 
 Peter Woodthorpe invented the Gollum voice as we know it. He just did. He voiced Gollum in the Bashki film and in this adaptation and Andy Serkis had no choice but to inherit and very slightly adapt it. Fun fact – Peter Woodthorpe also voiced “Pigsy” in the English version of the immortal Monkey! 
 The greatness of Michael Hordern as an actor seems clearer and clearer to me with every passing year. Nobody did inefficient patriarchy better than Hordern. He was the perfect Plautian senex and a wonderful Sir Anthony Absolute (I got to see that, I did!). But he was also a very great Lear. Anything that ruthlessly exposed the limited powers of the patriarch – was Hordern’s world. How does this suit Gandalf? I’ve been giving the matter some thought. Gandalf is not like other wizards you have known. He is not serene. He is not prophetic. You do not go and visit him – he comes to you. He bustles and is busy and when he is riding Shadowfax he regularly beats Middle Earth land speed records. And this bustling quality allows Hordern to be a very great Gandalf, he is someone who does not control events but who pursues them – who does not stand back and nod his head sagely but fights in the front row. Ian Mckellen’s Gandalf is little more than a plausible impression of Michael Hordern’s performance.
 Above all, perhaps, there is the very great Robert Stephens as Aragorn. Acknowledged as the equal of the great hard-drinking hell-raisers of the 1960s like Richards Harris and Burton, he never quite gained the same cinematic prominence. In the 1980s, he re-emerged as a great stage talent. I never saw his Falstaff, but I saw him very close up as King Herod in Tony Harrison’s Mystery Cycle. The voice of Robert Stephens, a voice that seems capable of indicating every conceivable vowel and diphthong within each and every syllable – is unmistakeable – and perfect for depicting the strangely ageless indeterminacy of a Numenorean. (To impersonate Robert Stephens, imagine that every vowel is every vowel.) When you hear him for the first time in the Prancing Pony, he sounds rustic – and the rusticity of Strider remains a leitmotif that interrupts the steady majesty of King Elessar. He is a man of destiny and a man who lives many lives simultaneously.
 So I will not wait another forty years before listening to this again. In fact, I’d better not.
 Share this:
 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 
 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 
 Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) 
 Bluesky 
 Like Loading... 
 Related 
 From → Uncategorized 
 4 Comments 
 Gary Payne permalink 
 Waited 40 years to listen again !? I listen to it every year since 1981, to me it is the ultimate adaptation, Jackson’s movies are fine but pale in comparison
 Reply 
 Mark Williams permalink 
 Robert Stephens – the best possible Aragorn.
 Reply 
 stephenpalmersf permalink 
 It’s the greatest adaptation of them all. I listen to the music many times a year – usually in or near woods. It grounds me in a way almost nothing else can. 
 Reply 
 cobrunstrom permalink 
 It’s wonderful music to be sure… it manages to convey the weight, the effort, and yet the joy of the quest.
 Reply 
 Leave a comment Cancel reply 
 Δ 
 « Sectoral Solidarity demands we admit it’s been Dreadful. 
 Phillis Wheatley died OTD in 1784 »
 Blog at WordPress.com. 
 Comment 
 Reblog 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 conradbrunstrom 
 Join 1,269 other subscribers
 Sign me up 
 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 
 conradbrunstrom 
 Subscribe 
 Subscribed 
 Sign up 
 Log in 
 Copy shortlink 
 Report this content 
 View post in Reader 
 Manage subscriptions 
 Collapse this bar 
 %d
