What are your thoughts on boxed text? 
 D&D Sage Advice 
 Questions on Dungeons & Dragons answered by game designers
 Widgets 
 Skip to content 
 Search for D&D answers Search 
 Top Sage Advice
 Is transmutation spell Alter Self lvl 2 allow to change gender for duration? 
 Polymorph says you can't cast spells while in beast form. Does that mean you also can't concentrate on them? 
 Druid turns into a bug, gets eaten by a humanoid bad guy and reverts back, what happens? 
 D&D CARDS - Equipment, Treasure, Condition, Inspiration and many more! 
 A kid-friendly D&D character sheet 
 Type your email… 
 Subscribe 
 This is an unofficial D&D site made by Zoltar to collect game designer tweets and help players of the best game ever created.
 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 
To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 Cookie Policy 
 Search for: 
 What are your thoughts on boxed text?
 May 5, 2019 Zoltar 
 Here's an interesting conversation started by a #DnD designer! What are YOUR thoughts on boxed text? https://t.co/L8WqQV5L5z 
 — Dungeons & Dragons (@Wizards_DnD) April 13, 2019 
 Thanks for sharing the conversation!
 — James Introcaso (@JamesIntrocaso) April 13, 2019 
 This is a Twitter poll for #dnd DMs. Do you prefer read-aloud text in published adventures?
 — SlyFlourish (@SlyFlourish) April 14, 2019 
 In my own #dnd adventure writing I use boxed text, and “area aspects” which are like bullet points. I also avoid talking about living things in boxed text to avoid the whole “those orcs I mentioned aren’t really there”. Brevity is critically important as well. https://t.co/NFcZEy2CEw 
 — SlyFlourish (@SlyFlourish) April 12, 2019 
 Honestly, I love boxed text. Even when I run home games, I write boxed text for myself and read it almost verbatim–and digress when I've forgotten something or I decide I want to go off-script. The baseline script that I can throw away if needed is immensely useful.
 — James 🌺 Haeck (@jamesjhaeck) April 13, 2019 
 The dreaded #DnD boxed text debate: I think boxed text has a place, particularly for DMs that don't have time to do a lot of prep or to make sure a particular mood is established. In particular it seems to help in convention settings. pic.twitter.com/7lqbGy7Kpr 
 — Greg Marks 🐈 (@Skerrit7h3green) April 15, 2019 
 However, I also think lots of boxed text is unnecessary (an empty room doesn't need boxed text), too long (anything over a paragraph or so), written poorly burying important details, pretends to be a story to be listened to by the players, preventing them from being involved.
 — Greg Marks 🐈 (@Skerrit7h3green) April 15, 2019 
 I never thought about box text being a problem until I started seeing things listed as bullet points. I quickly learned to like keeping things in “my voice” as I described a setting. Yeah, its also an issue that people have been "trained" over the years by the boxed text that has been provided, but we haven't been innovating as much as we should have been.
 — Greg Marks 🐈 (@Skerrit7h3green) April 15, 2019 
 i agree. i think sometimes a story needs a bit of boxed text at the beginning or if something happens suddenly in the narrative, like in Once in Waterdeep. that being said, ive read quite a few adventures where the important details were buried away because there was no box text I am all for boxed text for complicated descriptions where details are key (like puzzle traps) or for villain speeches to set a mood.
 — Greg Marks 🐈 (@Skerrit7h3green) April 15, 2019 
 A point I was trying to make was that if boxed text worked well, then we would see it used on the streams as a go-to to start a scene. I don’t think we ever see it. Instead, we see a back-and-forth between the DM & Players. Something a “box of text” in my mind makes much harder. While this is true, different people (and roles) have different needs. A majority of DMs out there WANT boxed text (well-written hopefully) to make their lives easier when they buy adventure content. So it is a risk not to provide what your audience and consumers want.
 — Shawn Merwin (or a poor clone) (@shawnmerwin) April 14, 2019 
 Share this:
 Tweet 
 WhatsApp 
 Telegram 
 Email 
 Post navigation
 ← 
 → 
 Leave a Reply Cancel reply 
 This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. 
 Proudly powered by WordPress 
 | 
 Theme: Fictive by WordPress.com .
