The Lord of the Rings (1955 radio series) - Wikipedia 
 Jump to content 
 Main menu 
 Main menu
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 Navigation
 Main page 
 Contents 
 Current events 
 Random article 
 About Wikipedia 
 Contact us 
 Contribute
 Help 
 Learn to edit 
 Community portal 
 Recent changes 
 Upload file 
 Special pages 
 Search 
 Search 
 Appearance 
 Donate 
 Create account 
 Log in 
 Personal tools 
 Donate 
 Create account 
 Log in 
 Contents
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 (Top)
 1 
 Context 
 2 
 Broadcast history 
 3 
 Content 
 4 
 Cast 
 5 
 Reception 
 Toggle Reception subsection 
 5.1 
 Critics and the public 
 5.2 
 Tolkien's opinion 
 6 
 References 
 7 
 Sources 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 The Lord of the Rings (1955 radio series)
 2 languages 
 Español 
 Français 
 Edit links 
 Article 
 Talk 
 English 
 Read 
 Edit 
 View history 
 Tools 
 Tools
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 Actions
 Read 
 Edit 
 View history 
 General
 What links here 
 Related changes 
 Upload file 
 Permanent link 
 Page information 
 Cite this page 
 Get shortened URL 
 Switch to legacy parser 
 Print/export
 Download as PDF 
 Printable version 
 In other projects
 Wikidata item 
 Appearance
 move to sidebar 
 hide 
 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
 Radio play
 For other uses, see The Lord of the Rings (disambiguation) .
 The script was rediscovered in 2022. This sheet, handwritten by J. R. R. Tolkien , includes Frodo 's exclamation O Elbereth! Gilthoniel! . [ 1 ] 
 During 1955 and 1956, a condensed radio dramatisation of The Lord of the Rings , adapted and produced by Terence Tiller , was broadcast in two series of six episodes each on BBC Radio 's the Third Programme . These radio broadcasts were the first dramatisation of The Lord of the Rings , a book by J. R. R. Tolkien , the final volume of which, The Return of the King , had been published in October 1955. The script had been thought lost, but it was rediscovered in the BBC archives in 2022.
 The cast included Norman Shelley as Gandalf and Tom Bombadil , Felix Felton as Bilbo and Sauron and Robert Farquharson as Saruman and Denethor .
 The adaptation had a mixed reception from newspaper critics at the time. The radio audience welcomed the first series, where Tiller had selected which scenes to use and which to cut; the audience was far more critical of the second series, where Tiller had compressed many scenes. Tolkien did not like the broadcasts, or the BBC's panel of critics.
 Context
 [ edit ] 
 Further information: The Lord of the Rings 
 J. R. R. Tolkien was an English author and philologist of ancient Germanic languages , specialising in Old English ; he spent much of his career as a professor at the University of Oxford . [ 2 ] He is best known for his novels about his invented Middle-earth , The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings , and for the posthumously published The Silmarillion which provides a more mythical narrative about earlier ages. A devout Roman Catholic , he described The Lord of the Rings as "a fundamentally religious and Catholic work", rich in Christian symbolism . [ 3 ] 
 The BBC , founded in 1922, is the largest and oldest British public service broadcaster . It is headquartered in London , England. [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] 
 Broadcast history
 [ edit ] 
 During 1955 and 1956, BBC Radio 's Third Programme , a cultural and music channel, broadcast a condensed radio dramatisation of The Lord of the Rings in twelve episodes. These radio broadcasts were the first dramatisation of J. R. R. Tolkien 's epic 1954–55 fantasy The Lord of the Rings . Since the BBC did not generally keep long-term archives of its productions at that time, no copies of the full adaptation are known to have survived. However, the opening theme of the series survives in a single clip from a 2016 radio special. [ 7 ] Although virtually all audio of the series is lost, and the script too had been thought lost, the Tolkien scholar Stuart Lee rediscovered the full script for the dramatization in the BBC archives, including annotations by Tolkien himself, in 2022. Lee's research on the script was published as an essay in The Great Tales Never End: Essays in Memory of Christopher Tolkien (2022). [ 1 ] [ 8 ] 
The broadcasts were adapted and produced by Terence Tiller , [ 1 ] who corresponded with Tolkien for advice concerning the second series. [ 9 ] [ 10 ] 
 Radio was the dominant broadcast medium in the United Kingdom at the time, and the broadcasts helped to publicise the book. The broadcasts were discussed on the BBC programme The Critics . The broadcasts brought the book to the attention of a man named Sam Gamgee, surprising Tolkien as his name was that of a Lord of the Rings character . Gamgee wrote to Tolkien to ask about the origin of the character's name, to which Tolkien replied with a full explanation of its real and its fictitious etymology . [ 11 ] 
 Content
 [ edit ] 
 Artist's impression of a Nazgûl , depicted as a shadowy but solid body, cloaked and hooded in black, wearing a sword, and mounted on a black horse 
 The rediscovered script shows Tiller's construction of the radio series. A sheet in Tolkien's handwriting shows that he rewrote a scene soon after the Nazgûl confrontation scene on Weathertop, in which the hobbit Frodo Baggins is stabbed by their leader, who had once been the Witch-king of Angmar , with a Morgul-knife. [ 8 ] Among the descriptions on the sheet for the narrator to voice, Tolkien redrafted the dialogue: [ 1 ] 
 "}}'> Frodo: What has happened? Where is the pale King? 
Sam: We lost you, Mr Frodo. Where did you get to? 
Frodo: Didn’t you see them? – the wraiths, and the King? 
Aragorn: No, only their shadows… [ 1 ] 
 Cast
 [ edit ] 
 The cast for the series was: [ 12 ] 
 Derek Hart – Narrator
 Oliver Burt – Frodo 
 Norman Shelley – Gandalf , Tom Bombadil , Old Man, Additional voices
 Victor Platt – Sam 
 Godfrey Kenton – Aragorn , Mablung, Additional voices
 Michael Collins – Merry 
 Basil Jones – Pippin 
 Felix Felton – Bilbo , Sauron , Witch-king of Angmar ("The Black Captain"), Orcs , Additional voices
 Derek Prentice – Boromir , Faramir , Beregond , Orcs, Additional voices
 Frank Duncan – Legolas , Halbarad , Additional voices
 Eric Lugg – Gimli , Additional voices
 Gerik Schjelderup – Gollum , Orcs
 Robert Farquharson – Saruman , Denethor 
 Valentine Dyall – Théoden , Treebeard , Orcs
 Bernard Rebel – Wormtongue 
 Garard Green – Elrond , Celeborn , Additional voices
 Nicolette Bernard – Galadriel , Goldberry 
 John Baker – Orcs
 Olive Gregg – Eowyn 
 David Hemmings – Bergil
 Noel Johnson – Éomer 
 Prunella Scales – Ioreth 
 Roger Snowdon – Orcs
 Reception
 [ edit ] 
 Critics and the public
 [ edit ] 
 The critic Paul Ferris wrote in 1955 in The Observer that the first series offered "the best light listening for the next five weeks ... [with the] pure quality of fairy-tale ... charming without being slight". [ 8 ] [ 13 ] 
Lee records that another early review in an unknown newspaper, preserved in the BBC archives, stated that the "relaxed, vivid, and masculine style" of Tolkien's writing somehow adapted quite naturally to the medium of radio. The reviewer was comfortable, too, with the passages voiced by the narrator, saying that even in explanations Tolkien was able to hold the listener's attention. [ 8 ] 
Listeners' reactions were analysed by the BBC's audience researchers in the 1950s. They found that 1 adult in 1000 in Britain had listened in. For the first series, audience appreciation had by the last episode reached 64 out of 100 from an initial score of 56, against an average for all programmes on the channel of 65. [ 8 ] 
 Lee added that most of the recorded comments were very positive. He notes that listeners were divided about whether the series was "a milestone in BBC history", or a waste of listeners' time on a serious channel playing material meant for children. Overall, listeners enjoyed the first series, where Tiller had followed Tolkien's advice to make a selection of scenes and cut the rest. They were far more critical of the second series, where Tiller had compressed many scenes, resulting in what a self-described " Civil Servant " called "a footling and ridiculous sounding adventure story of the 'with one bound Jack was free' type". [ 8 ] 
 Tolkien's opinion
 [ edit ] 
 Tolkien had had, in Lee's words, "a long and strained relationship with the BBC", starting in 1936 with a broadcast of his modern English version of the medieval poem Pearl . Tolkien from the start was sceptical about reducing nearly 400 pages of The Lord of the Rings to less than five hours of radio. He stated directly that he would prefer scenes to be cut rather than compressed to mere summaries. [ 8 ] 
 Tolkien's opinion on these broadcasts was revealed in several of his letters . In November 1955, he told Molly Waldron that he believed that the book was "quite unsuitable for 'dramatization', and have not enjoyed the broadcasts—though they have improved. I thought Tom Bombadil dreadful—but worse still was the announcer's preliminary remarks that Goldberry was his daughter (!), and that Willowman was an ally of Mordor (!!)." [ 14 ] 
 The following month, Tolkien wrote to the novelist Naomi Mitchison "I think poorly of the broadcast adaptations. Except for a few details I think they are not well done, even granted the script and the legitimacy of the enterprise (which I do not grant). But they took some trouble with the names. I thought that the dwarf ( Glóin not Gimli [...]) was not too bad, if a bit exaggerated." [ 15 ] The same day, he wrote to Rayner Unwin that he "agreed with the [newspaper] 'critics' view of the radio adaptation" but was "annoyed" that they should "turn their attention" on him and the book when they admitted they had not read it. [ 16 ] Further, he found the speakers on the BBC's programme The Critics "intolerable with a superiority that only ignorance can maintain". However, he noted that the review in The Times "was appreciative". As for the radio series itself, Tiller had in his view "managed excellently" with the Elves and the Council of Elrond , but had wrongly made Bilbo Baggins sound bored. [ 8 ] 
 In November 1956, Tolkien wrote to Tiller concerning the accents to be used in the production of a second series: "I paid great attention to such linguistic differentiation as was possible: in diction, idiom and so on; and I doubt if much more can be imported, except in so far as the individual actor represents his feeling for the character in tone and style." [ 9 ] A few days later, he wrote to Tiller again concerning scripts for three of the episodes, saying, "Here is a book very unsuitable for dramatic or semi-dramatic representation. If that is attempted, it needs more space, a lot of space. ... Personally, I think it requires rather the older art of the reading 'mime', than the more nearly dramatic, which results in too great an emphasis on dialogue (mostly with its setting removed). ... I feel you have had a very hard task." [ 10 ] 
 Tolkien was unimpressed by the results. Replying to Rayner Unwin in 1957 concerning an enquiry about the possibility of making a cartoon of The Lord of the Rings , he wrote: "I think I should find vulgarization less painful than the sillification achieved by the B.B.C." [ 17 ] 
 References
 [ edit ] 
 1 2 3 4 5 Alberge, Dalya (12 March 2022). "Hoard of the rings: 'lost' scripts for BBC Tolkien drama discovered" . The Guardian . Retrieved 23 April 2022 . 
 ↑ Carpenter 1977 , pp. 111, 200, 266. 
 ↑ Carpenter 2023 , letter 142 to Robert Murray , 2 December 1953 
 ↑ "BBC History – The BBC takes to the Airwaves" . BBC News . Archived from the original on 6 March 2007 . Retrieved 19 July 2007 . 
 ↑ "BBC: World's largest broadcaster & Most trusted media brand" . Media Newsline . 13 August 2009. Archived from the original on 5 October 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2010 . 
 ↑ "About the BBC – What is the BBC" . BBC. Archived from the original on 16 January 2010 . Retrieved 23 September 2010 . 
 ↑ "Archive on 4 – Tolkien: The Lost Recordings – BBC Sounds" . BBC. Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 April 2022 . 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Lee 2022 . 
 1 2 Carpenter 2023 , #193 to Terence Tiller , 2 November 1956 
 1 2 Carpenter 2023 , #194 to Terence Tiller , 6 November 1956 
 ↑ Carpenter 2023 , #184 to Sam Gamgee, 18 March 1956 
 ↑ Lee 2022 , p. 164. 
 ↑ Ferris, Paul (20 November 1955). "Reviews". The Observer . 
 ↑ Carpenter 2023 , #175 to Mrs Molly Waldron, 30 November 1955 
 ↑ Carpenter 2023 , #176 to Naomi Mitchison , 8 December 1955 
 ↑ Carpenter 2023 , #177 to Rayner Unwin , 8 December 1955 
 ↑ Carpenter 2023 , #198 to Rayner Unwin , 19 June 1957 
 Sources
 [ edit ] 
 Carpenter, Humphrey (1977). J. R. R. Tolkien: A Biography . New York: Ballantine Books . ISBN 978-0-04-928037-3 . 
 Carpenter, Humphrey , ed. (2023) [1981]. The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien : Revised and Expanded Edition . New York: HarperCollins . ISBN 978-0-35-865298-4 . 
 Lee, Stuart D. (2022). "A Milestone in BBC History? The 1955-56 Radio Dramatization of The Lord of the Rings". In Ovenden, Richard; McIlwaine, Catherine (eds.). The Great Tales Never End: Essays in Memory of Christopher Tolkien . Bodleian Library Publishing . ISBN 978-1-8512-4565-9 . Also available online .
 v 
 t 
 e 
 The Lord of the Rings 
 J. R. R. Tolkien 
 Constructing The Lord of the Rings 
 About 
 Volumes
 The Fellowship of the Ring 
 The Two Towers 
 The Return of the King 
 Stories
 " The Shadow of the Past "
 " The Council of Elrond "
 " The Scouring of the Shire "
 " The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen "
 Translating 
 list 
 Swedish 
 Reception
 Impact 
 Literary 
 Fandom 
 Fan fiction 
 Oxonmoot 
 Tolkienmoot 
 Works inspired 
 Tolkien's impact on fantasy 
 Annotation
 A Reader's Companion 
 Elements 
 Languages 
 Black Speech 
 Elvish 
 Quenya 
 Sindarin 
 Khuzdul 
 Westron 
 Poetry 
 A Elbereth Gilthoniel 
 Namárië 
 Song of Eärendil 
 The Man in the Moon Stayed Up Too Late 
 The Road Goes Ever On 
 A Walking Song 
 Other 
 Artwork 
 Family trees 
 Heraldry 
 Maps 
 Proverbs 
 Scripts 
 Cirth 
 Tengwar 
 Analysis 
 Themes 
 Addiction to power 
 Ancestry as guide to character 
 Architecture 
 Company of the Ring 
 Death and immortality 
 Decline and fall 
 Divination 
 Dreams and visions 
 Economy 
 England 
 Environmentalism 
 Evil 
 Feudal allegiance 
 Forests 
 Geology 
 Hell 
 Heroism 
 Luck and fate 
 Magic 
 Mental illness 
 Moral dilemma 
 Music 
 Naming of weapons 
 Northern courage 
 Paganism 
 Plants 
 Prophecy 
 Psychological journeys 
 Quests 
 Race 
 Sexuality 
 Sound and language 
 Time 
 Trees 
 Women 
 Influences 
 Antiquarianism 
 Beowulf 
 Celtic 
 Christianity 
 Classical world 
 Edwardian adventure stories 
 First World War 
 Norse 
 Medieval 
 Modern sources 
 Modernism 
 William Morris 
 A mythology for England 
 Philology 
 Shakespeare 
 Techniques 
 Anachronism 
 Character pairing 
 Editorial framing 
 Frame stories 
 Pseudotranslation 
 Impression of depth 
 Narrative structure 
 Interlacing 
 Storytelling 
 Prose style 
 Ambiguity 
 Epic Pooh 
 Peoples 
 Maiar 
 Balrogs 
 Sauron 
 Wizards 
 Gandalf 
 Radagast 
 Saruman 
 Free
peoples 
 Dwarves 
 Balin 
 Gimli 
 Elves 
 Galadriel 
 Glorfindel 
 Half-elven 
 Arwen 
 Elrond 
 Legolas 
 Thranduil 
 Ents 
 Treebeard 
 Hobbits 
 Bilbo 
 Frodo 
 Merry 
 Pippin 
 Sam 
 Men 
 Beornings 
 Drúedain 
 Dúnedain 
 Aragorn 
 of Gondor 
 Boromir 
 Denethor 
 Faramir 
 of Rohan 
 Éomer 
 Éowyn 
 Théoden 
 Wormtongue 
 Monsters 
 Barrow-wight 
 Gollum 
 Nazgûl 
 Witch-king of Angmar 
 Old Man Willow 
 Orcs 
 Shelob 
 Trolls 
 Wargs 
 Watcher in the Water 
 Other 
 Eagles 
 Goldberry 
 Tom Bombadil 
 World 
 Geography 
 Middle-earth 
 Eriador
 Bree 
 Old Forest 
 Rivendell 
 The Shire 
 Bag End 
 Gondor 
 Minas Tirith 
 Harad 
 Lothlórien 
 Mirkwood 
 Moria 
 Mordor 
 Rohan 
 Isengard 
 Undying Lands 
 Battles 
 Helm's Deep 
 Pelennor Fields 
 Morannon 
 Things 
 Mithril 
 Oliphaunts 
 Palantírs 
 Phial of Galadriel 
 Rings of Power 
 One Ring 
 List of weapons and armour 
 Related
works 
 The Hobbit 
 The Adventures of Tom Bombadil 
 Errantry 
 Fastitocalon 
 The Sea-Bell 
 Donald Swann 
 The Road Goes Ever On 
 Bilbo's Last Song 
 The Silmarillion 
 Unfinished Tales 
 The Letters of J. R. R. Tolkien 
 The History of Middle-earth 
 The Children of Húrin 
 The History of The Hobbit 
 Beren and Lúthien 
 The Fall of Gondolin 
 The Nature of Middle-earth 
 Adaptations and derivative works 
 Books 
 Bored of the Rings (1969)
 The Last Ringbearer (1999)
 Muddle Earth (2003)
 Illustrations 
 A Map of Middle-earth 
 Pauline Baynes 
 Barbara Remington 
 John Howe 
 Alan Lee 
 Margrethe II of Denmark 
 Ted Nasmith 
 Theatre 
 Fellowship! (2005)
 The Lord of the Rings (2006)
 Music 
 Bo Hansson 
 Music Inspired by Lord of the Rings (1972)
 Johan de Meij 
 Symphony No. 1 The Lord of the Rings (1988)
 Led Zeppelin 
 " Ramble On " (1969)
 " Misty Mountain Hop " (1971)
 " The Battle of Evermore " (1971)
 Radio 
 The Lord of the Rings ( BBC , 1955)
 The Lord of the Rings ( NPR , 1979)
 Hordes of the Things (1980)
 The Lord of the Rings (BBC, 1981)
 Der Herr der Ringe (1992)
 Film 
 Animated 
 The Lord of the Rings ( Bakshi , 1978)
 The Return of the King ( Rankin/Bass , 1980)
 The War of the Rohirrim ( Kamiyama , 2024)
 Peter Jackson
series 
 The Fellowship of the Ring (2001)
 The Two Towers (2002)
 The Return of the King (2003)
 Music 
 " Concerning Hobbits "
 " Into the West "
 " May It Be "
 The Music of the Lord of the Rings Films (2010 book)
 Approach 
 Production 
 Hobbiton Movie Set 
 Peter Jackson's interpretation 
 Picturing Tolkien 
 Tolkien on Film 
 Other 
 Sagan om ringen (1971)
 Khraniteli (1991)
 Hobitit (1993)
 The Rings of Power (2022)
 music 
 The Hunt for Gollum (2027)
 Fan-made 
 The Hunt for Gollum (2009)
 Born of Hope (2009)
 Video games 
 Journey to Rivendell 
 Game One 
 Game Two: Shadows of Mordor 
 War in Middle Earth 
 Vol. I (1990) 
 Vol. I (SNES) 
 Riders of Rohan 
 Elendor 
 Vol. II: The Two Towers 
 The Fellowship of the Ring 
 The Two Towers 
 The Return of the King 
 War of the Ring 
 The Third Age 
 GBA 
 The Battle for Middle-earth 
 Tactics 
 The Battle for Middle-earth II 
 The Rise of the Witch-king 
 Conquest 
 Aragorn's Quest 
 War in the North 
 Lego The Lord of the Rings 
 Guardians of Middle-earth 
 Shadow of Mordor 
 Shadow of War 
 Gollum 
 Return to Moria 
 The Lord of the Rings Online 
 Mines of Moria 
 Siege of Mirkwood 
 Rise of Isengard 
 Riders of Rohan 
 Helm's Deep 
 Mordor 
 Minas Morgul 
 War of Three Peaks 
 Fate of Gundabad 
 Before the Shadow 
 Tabletop role-
playing games 
 Middle-earth Role Playing 
 The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game 
 The One Ring Roleplaying Game 
 Adventures in Middle-earth 
 Board games 
 Middle Earth 
 War of the Ring 
 Gondor: The Siege of Minas Tirith 
 Sauron 
 Lord of the Rings 
 War of the Ring 
 Card games 
 Middle-earth Collectible Card Game 
 The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game 
 The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game 
 Other games 
 Middle-earth Strategy Battle Game 
 Lego The Lord of the Rings 
 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Lord_of_the_Rings_(1955_radio_series)&oldid=1347650493 "
 Categories : Radio programmes based on Middle-earth 
 Lost BBC Radio programmes 
 BBC Radio dramas 
 British radio dramas 
 1955 radio dramas 
 Fantasy radio programs 
 Works based on The Lord of the Rings 
 Hidden categories: Articles with short description 
 Short description is different from Wikidata 
 Good articles 
 Use British English from November 2023 
 All Wikipedia articles written in British English 
 Use dmy dates from April 2022 
 This page was last edited on 7 April 2026, at 23:14 (UTC) .
 Page was rendered with Parsoid .
 Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.
 Privacy policy 
 About Wikipedia 
 Disclaimers 
 Contact Wikipedia 
 Legal & safety contacts 
 Code of Conduct 
 Developers 
 Statistics 
 Cookie statement 
 Mobile view 
 Search 
 Search 
 Toggle the table of contents 
 The Lord of the Rings (1955 radio series)
 2 languages 
 Add topic
