                   Shadows of the New Sun: Wolfe on Writing/Writers on Wolfe
                   Peter Wright (ed.)

                   https://doi.org/10.5949/liverpool/9781846310577.001.0001
                   Published: 2007      Online ISBN: 9781846314056       Print ISBN: 9781846310577




                                                                                                                 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
 CHAPTER

3 An Interview with Gene Wolfe 
Melissa Mia Hall

https://doi.org/10.5949/liverpool/9781846310577.003.0004          Pages 36–43
Published: August 2007




  Abstract
  Reprinted from Amazing Science Fiction Stories, September 1981, Hall's interview takes place at the 1980
  World Science Fiction Convention in Boston. Her conversation with Wolfe explores his development as
  a writer, his use of symbolism and intertextuality, his sense of humour, and his major themes. In a
  series of brief exchanges, Wolfe re ects on the state of fantasy and science ction, his early ction, his
  writing schedule, and his appreciation of the innovations of Ursula LeGuin, R. A. La erty, Ron Goulart
  and Somtow Sucharitkul.



  Keywords: Gene Wolfe, Melissa Mia Hall, Symbolism, Humour, Themes, Ursula LeGuin, R. A. La erty, Ron
  Goulart, Somtow Sucharitkul, Amazing Science Fiction Stories
  Subject: Literary Theory and Cultural Studies




First published in Amazing Science Fiction Stories in September 1981, Melissa Mia Hall's interview follows the
publication of Gene Wolfe's Book of Days (1981), his second short story collection, but predates the
publication of The Claw of the Conciliator, volume two of The Book of the New Sun. Like Joan Gordon, she
cannot resist asking for ‘hints’ to the contents of the rest of the tetralogy. Wolfe obliges – with further
hints.

Boston, the second day of the 1980 World Science Fiction Convention and I'm going to meet Gene Wolfe and
interview him. First, I have to make contact. I'm wandering past the cavernous huckster's room with a
friend. I glimpse a middle-aged man with a receding hairline, and an amiable air about him, almost
childlike, eyes glancing around brightly. I know it's Gene Wolfe although I 've never seen him before. I
nudge my friend. ‘Is that Gene Wolfe?’ He says he thinks so and I rush forward just as he starts moving
away. ‘Gene! Gene Wolfe!’ I yell, knowing I must look frantic. He pauses politely, extends a hand. I introduce
myself clumsily and compliment him so profusely that he must think I'm lying or insane.

We meet several times during the convention, mostly for short conversations, enough to get to the point
about where the big interview set for Sunday noon will take place, but not enough for me to know who he is.
He is still the Man who wrote the currently enfolding Book of the New Sun, The Island of Doctor Death and
Other Stories and Other Stories and Gene Wolfe's Book of Days.
        When the hour arrives for the session with Gene, I am therefore a little scared, very much excited and tired.
        Like most convention goers, I stay up too late and consequently appear a bit bedraggled. Gene, on the other
        hand, although he was up late, too, appears wide awake and ready for anything. We sit down and soon the
        interview begins in earnest. I begin to know Gene Wolfe – a comfortable sort of man, deliberately
        thoughtful and wryly humorous, just as much a paradox as one of his stories.

        MMH: You 're noted for your elegantly crafted writing and you 've been writing for sixteen years. What's the




                                                                                                                            Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
        most important thing you've learned about the craft of writing?

p. 37   GW: I think the most important thing I ever learned was that you must write to be read rather than write
        what gives you pleasure to write. In other words, you should be attempting to create something for a reader,
        rather than indulging your whims.

        MMH: Religion, spirit, magic, the pursuit of light, the analysis of darkness, all of these pervade your work.
        Do you consciously set out in search of them? Do you feel like you're a writer with a mission? What comes
         rst, the message or the art?

        [There is a pause as Gene re ects on this loaded question, his brow appropriately furrowed.]

        GW: The art comes rst or the message doesn't come at all. The message comes from me. I am a religious
        person (Roman Catholic). I am, I suppose, in a very, very minor way, something of a mystic and when you
        read my material, I think it comes through … I don't believe in writing with a message unless that is what
        you're paid to do. I think a proper writer with a message is a propagandist or an advertising copywriter. He's
        paid to write with a message. A supposedly artistic and literary writer has no business in writing
        propaganda.

        MMH: You use a large amount of cultural jumping, for example. Tommy Kirk, Mickey Mouse, etc. in ‘Three
        Fingers’ – the list is endless. There are constant asides throughout your short stories (Huck Finn, Little
        Nell, etc.). It's as if you've undertaken a holy cause to further engrave them upon the minds of your reader.
        Do you realize that you've been doing this?

        GW: No, it just happens. I think you would say these things are symbols that have emotional power and a
        person who is doing literary writing must deal in emotion charged symbols – and so you end up writing
        about things like death and lions and sacramental meals, perhaps because those are emotional things that
        wake certain feelings in the deep spring of the individual. I'm using it as I have to, to engage and stir the
        reader's emotions. And if ction doesn't do that, then it's failed. That's the purpose of ction.

        MMH: I've also noticed the rich reservoir of humour you tap into from time to time in your work. How
        important is humour to you?.

        GW: I don't know. On a schedule of 0–10, it's probably about a 6. Humour is a wonderful thing. It's very
        under-appreciated. One of the reasons that it is, is that it's no good when it's out of place and it's very
        frequently out of place.

        MMH: Do you feel that there are major themes latent in your work or is that hogwash? What's more
        important – the plot, the characters –

        GW: Oh, certainly – again, if you want to do deep emotional things, you have to deal with major themes.
        Some traditionals answer that all writing is about Love and Death, which is a title of a Woody Allen movie.
p. 38   But there's a certain layer of truth in it. There are things that are major for   people. Living or dying is very
        fundamental. Getting love, losing love, those are very fundamental things. Exploring new territory is
        fundamental. Being imprisoned or breaking out of prison, all those are major themes. Major themes are the
        proper province of literature.
        [We both take a breath and relax a little. The outside light pouring in from the large picture window make his
        features hard to read. I plunge onwards with an easy question for me but a hard one for Gene.]

        MMH: Do you have any favourites among your stories?

        [He mulls that one for a bit and replies, rubbing his mouth and stretching.]

        GW: Well, I would say my topmost story would be ‘The Detective of Dreams’ in Dark Forces.




                                                                                                                           Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
        MMH: I loved it. (An eerie tale concerning dreams and Christ.)

        GW: That's my own favourite of all my short stories. About one story out of twenty seems to come close to
        what I really wanted it to be when I started it … Obviously, I may be wrong … ‘Westwind’ is also a favourite.
        ‘The Toy Theatre’ is another.

        MMH: What have been some of the major in uences on your writing?

        GW: Obviously, some things are more important than others. Probably the earliest in uences I had that were
        of any signi cance, were the Oz books and the two Alice books which I read as a child. G. K. Chesterton has
        undoubtedly been a major in uence. So has Borges, who was also in uenced by Chesterton. So has Dickens
        … H. G. Wells … Bram Stoker … Mervyn Peake. Modern writers. R. A. La erty, Ursula k. LeGuin. Damon
        Knight has in uenced me, not so much as a writer, but as an editor. I think Knight is probably as good as
        editors ever get.

        MMH: What are your primary goals?

        [Gene seems stunned. It's wonderful to watch him truly consider the question before he answers.]

        GW: Wow … WOW. [Another heavy silence.] I would like to be a really, really good writer, a ne writer. One of
        the things that took me a quarter of my life to learn was that the only way to really succeed is to do the thing
        that you do best. I'm one of those unfortunate kids who were bright enough to be a second rate
        mathematician. It takes more than bright, it takes a real talent for mathematics, a certain genius. And
        writing is one thing and I've found I seem to do best. And of course, I enjoy it.

        MMH: Could you talk a bit about how the Torturer series came into being?

        [Gene sees right through the phrasing of my question and pounces.]

        GW: Oh! My work – everybody always says – what was the idea that led to this story?

        MMH: Right, it's a very common question….

        GW: I'm not sure now that I can even recall all of the things that came together to make the Torturer stories.
p. 39   One of them was a certain mystical       or pseudo-religious element that I wanted to bring in. I was struck at
        some point by the realization that Jesus was cruci ed on a wooden cross and Jesus had been a carpenter. And
        a carpenter presumably had built that cross and that although the Gospel tells us that Jesus was a carpenter,
        he's only described as making one thing. The Gospel tells us one thing that Jesus Himself made. Do you
        know what it was?

        [Gene leans forward, waiting for an answer, wagging a nger at a tongue-tied student who's forgotten to do her
        homework.]

        MMH: No.

        [Gene's voice rises with excitement; he claps his hands and sits back.]
        GW: It was a whip! If you don't believe me, go back and read the New Testament. He made the whip that He
        used to drive the moneychangers from the temple. And all that stu              struck me in some half-witted way as
        signi cant. At the other end of the scale, at that time I was beginning to be worried about the idea that my
        work was insu      ciently visual … I've been tending to be too verbal, too cerebral …

        [As I let this sink in, I slump a little in my chair and realize I'm a lot sleepier than I want to be.]




                                                                                                                                 Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
        MMH: Could you give us some hints about The Claw of the Conciliator? [An inadvertent yawn slips out that Gene
        seizes upon merrily.]

        GW: I warn you, if you nod o      during this interview! [We laugh. I sit up straighter.] Well, you know the Claw of
        the Conciliator is the miraculous gem Severian gets stuck with in the rst book … and it really isn't
        immediately involved in any strange happenings. There are some things that are ambiguously miraculous in
        the second book, subject to rational explanations, but the rational explanations are a little di          cult to buy.
        The second book begins with Severian in a village which is fairly close to the gate where the rst book ended.
        He spends a good deal of the book in the House Absolute which is the Monarch's palace and then closes with
        him again on the road to Thrax.

        MMH: Why the ‘Doctor Island’ titles?

        GW: Well, the rst one, as you probably know, was a Nebula nominee. That was ‘The Island of Doctor Death
        and Other Stories’ and it was the only story, as far as I know, that lost to No Award. There were more votes
        for No Award than there were for that story. It was found afterwards that (this was fairly early in the history
        of the Nebula) some of the people that voted for No Award were under the impression that that meant they
        were abstaining in that category, and not voting for No Award to be given … So, I was talking to Joe Hensley
        (who's a good friend of mine who I haven't seen now in years) and he said you ought to write one called ‘The
        Death of Doctor Island’ because everyone would say – hey, here's a second shot at it, right? I didn't believe
        him, but it sounded like such a cute idea that I started thinking about how I could turn the original story
p. 40   around and       reverse a lot of the roles and have a di erent story that was sort of a mirror image of the rst
        one. And I did it and it turned out Joe was right, it did win a Nebula. And then … my wife said three's a good
        number, you know, so you ought to do a third story … So, I wrote ‘The Doctor of Death Island’ and at that
        point I decided that the business of trying to turn the plot and themes of the original story inside and out
        again – well – I had come to the end of it.

        MMH: Are you in favour of continuing the Nebula Awards?

        GW: Yes. Awards re ect their presenters. If SFWA'ans are corrupt, the Nebulas will be corrupt. If fans are, the
        Hugos will be, too. The value of any award is the value of the giver, which is why decorations bring little
        respect in the U.S. Armed Forces today.

        MMH: What do you have to say about the state of the art, current literature?

        GW: The most apparent thing to me in literature, in general – it seems to me that there are no living
        novelists of towering stature … the other really strange thing that has happened quite recently is the near
        death of poetry. Poetry is mankind's oldest literature to retain popularity with a bulldog grip for about 5000
        years and the grip has suddenly slipped. I've spent many hours trying to gure out why and there are some
        things that seem to have some bearing on the problem, but I'm not sure I really know why. It's very easy to
        blame things like the schools and television but I'm not sure those are valid … you know, I'll bet you could go
        through this hotel and not nd a person who could name ve major living poets.

        [Gene stops gloomily, his face a study in re ection and then resolutely brightens.]
        GW: I think that we are entering now, the real Golden Age of Science Fiction and of modern fantasy. Fantasy
        is in better shape than it has been since the Middle Ages. Science ction is in better shape that it has ever
        been, ever. There are more good writers and what's much more important than good writers, there are more
        good readers.

        MMH: You don't feel we've gone past the boom?




                                                                                                                             Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
        GW: We're seeing a downward trend now that is part of a general economic cycle. The reader, who say, a
        couple of years ago wouldn't have been willing to spend $8.95 for a hardcover science ction book, today
        has less money and is being asked to spend $12.95 for the same book … that is the decline, but the decline is
        not that the person doesn't want to read it … I think that the slump the publishing industry is talking about
        relates much more to publishing in general than it does to the science ction genre, in the broad sense.

        MMH: What was your rst published story?

        GW: My rst published story was ‘The Dead Man’ which appeared in Sir in 1965.

p. 41   MMH: What was your rst novel?

        GW: Operation Ares. I wrote a short story and sent it to Damon Knight for Orbit. Damon, at the time, was
        acting as an acquisition editor for Berkley Books and he said, ‘This isn't really a short story but it would be a
        pretty good rst chapter for a novel and I'll get you a contract for a novel, if you want it.’ And I was green
        enough that I took it. I say green enough because I wasn't really skilful enough to write a good novel at that
        time. I don't think Operation Ares is a very good novel but it was my rst book. It came out in 1970. That was
        a book that was sold about three years before it was produced. Those were three long years…

        MMH: Did you have a full-time job at that time?

        GW: I've had a full-time job all the time. I have a full-time job now.

        MMH: How do you do it?

        GW: This is my current schedule … it changes, depending on how things are going. I get up at 5:15 a.m.,
        shave, wash my face and by about a quarter to six, I'm in the basement at the typewriter and I write till
        about a quarter to eight and then Rosemary has my breakfast ready. I write each morning. But when things
        get tight, and I'm up against a deadline, I also write in the evening … now I'm a technical editor. I was an
        engineer for sixteen years. But I am now a senior editor on the sta      of Plant Engineering magazine. Basically,
        my writing experience combined with the engineering degree, too, enabled me to get this job which is,
        frankly, a good job and a lot of fun.

        MMH: Okay, I wanted to ask about Peace, your rst mainstream novel and how it evolved. Did it grow
        organically? Did you plot it carefully?

        GW: No, because it isn't a plotting book … The basic idea is that a man has died and he is haunting his own
        mind, his own past. This is something very few people seem to understand about Peace. If you'll notice the
        opening line of the book is ‘The elm tree planted by Eleanor Bold, the judge's daughter, fell last night.’ And,
        in the closing chapters of the book, Eleanor Bold comes to him and requests permission to plant an elm on
        his grave when he dies (she's on a reforestation kick or something) and of course, the old legend is – if
        there's a tree on a grave, when the tree falls, the falling of the tree releases a ghost on the Earth. In Peace
        that ghost prowls through his memories throughout the book.

        MMH: Of all your characters, who do you love the most?

        GW: Boy, that is tough. That is tough. I suppose I would have to say Severian.
        [Gene is totally absorbed in thinking about Severian and absolutely unprepared for the next question I've been
        waiting to ask. I launch into it slyly, trying not to grin.]

        MMH: When you dream at night, do your characters ever come and talk to you or when your characters
        dream, do you come and talk to them?

p. 42   [Gene jumps forward breaking into a wide smile.]




                                                                                                                             Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
        GW: Oh, aren't you getting fancy! I really wish I had an answer that is equal to that question. In honesty, I
        have to say no. But what does happen to me, and this is to me very frightening (the rst time it happened it
        scared the pants o     of me) is, I actually meet characters in real life!

        MMH: Oh, no – !

        GW: I wrote a book one time that's never been published. In it, I had a girl who was kind of a liar and a tramp,
        but she was also sympathetic in a number of respects … and I was driving my car and looked up in the
        rearview mirror and she was driving the car behind me, exactly as I had visualized her – exactly – and that
        was scary and the same thing happened in a couple of other instances. I will look around and there is that
        character … talking, breathing. Really, to strip this of any supernatural pretensions, which I don't think it
        deserves, what I think this really means is that I have the ability to envision characters who are su      ciently
        realistic that people like that can actually exist.

        MMH: You haven't met Severian yet?

        GW: No, no, I have not. That would be frightening. Severian – you see him in the book from the inside, but
        the people in the book see him as a rather grim and frightening gure. Towards the end of the book, Dorcas
        wakes up with Severian bending over her (in The Shadow of the Torturer) and he's been eating pomegranates
        so his lips and chin are stained with red juice. She gets quite a start out of it. There are other tip-o s in the
        book as well. He is a large man physically. He is hatchet-faced with piercing eyes. Rather inexpressive and
        although he is a very decent individual by his own lights, he really isn't very bothered by other people's pain
        and su ering. And he isn't very bothered by his own … pain has been a part of his life, all of his life.

        [When Gene nishes I nd that I've been almost hypnotized. It's di cult to remember what my next question is; I'm
        still full of thoughts concerning the mysterious Severian.]

        MMH: He's almost a trance-like character, like he's walking in a waking dream. Okay, your contribution to
        raising the level of sf and fantasy is incalculable. [A yawn escapes before I can hide it.] Who do you feel is
        doing exciting, innovative work in that eld?

        [Gene almost jumps out of his chair acting dramatic, points a nger at me.]

        GW: You're dropping o       again, Melissa!

        He laughs and laughs, repeating, ‘Yes, you are!’ several times to my hopeless protestations. Finally he
        concedes to sit back and reply.

        GW: Ursula LeGuin, absolutely. R. A. La erty has been doing it for years now and has not gotten anything
        like the recognition he serves … If I had to pick the most underrated writer in sf, I think Ron Goulart would
        be the one. New Writers? Somtow Sucharitkul.

p. 43   MMH: Did you know that there is now a eld called Gene Wolfe ction and that no one but Gene Wolfe can
        write it? How would you describe the ction of Gene Wolfe?

        GW: This is something that I got from Harlan Ellison, who, all kidding aside (and nobody kids Harlan more
        than I, believe me) who is rst of all, a ne person and is secondly, a ne writer – I heard Harlan say one
time, and as soon as he said it, realized it was absolutely true, that every writer who's worth a damn has a
unique product … I don't think there's anybody else who writes Gene Wolfe stories or Ursula K. LeGuin
stories … people always tend to say that old so-and-so is another – and then they name some famous
writer. H. G. Wells, in the latter half of his career, was called the second Dickens. There never will be a
second of any writer that's really worth a damn.

MMH: That's right. Your next books are….




                                                                                                                   Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/liverpool-scholarship-online/book/43238/chapter/362966023 by Acquisition Services user on 28 August 2023
GW: The third volume of The Book of the New Sun is The Sword of the Lictor. The fourth volume is The Citadel of
the Autarch. You see, before I marketed The Shadow of the Torturer, I had all four volumes in second draft
because I didn't want to get in a situation where the rst volume was set and then I couldn't make changes
to make the series end the way that I thought it should end and so I went through two drafts on all the
books. This kind of thing is the great advantage of writing on the side as opposed to writing for a living.

MMH: And you'd describe yourself as a part-time writer. [I want to get this down; to memorise it for posterity.]

GW: I am a part-time writer.

MMH: Astounding.

GW: I'm holding a full-time job. I work forty hours a week. Sometimes more.

MMH: Well, that makes me feel a lot better.
