 

 10 Thoughts On “AI,” February 2026 Edition | Whatever 

 Whatever 

 DIGITAL CONTENT FROM ANALOG PEOPLE

 Menu 

 Home 

 About 
 
 A Brief Biography of John Scalzi 

 Availability for Interviews, Appearances, Writing Work and Optioning Existing Work 

 Books and Other Projects by John Scalzi 

 Contact Information 

 Guidelines for Publicity, Blurbing, Unpublished Work, Story Ideas, Social Media Boosting, Guest Blogging, Charitable Solicitations, Autographing, Educational Use and School Assignments 

 Scheduled Appearances 

 Site Disclaimer, Comment, Privacy and “AI” Policy 

 The Canonical Bacon Page 

 The Scalzi Creative Sampler 

 Scalzi Enterprises · The Scalzi Family Foundation 

 10 Thoughts On “AI,” February 2026 Edition

 Posted on February 14, 2026 
 
 Posted by John Scalzi 
 
 65 Comments 

 Because it feels like a good time to do it, some current thoughts on “AI” and where it, we and I are about the thing, midway through February 2026. These are thoughts in no particular order. Some of them I’ve noted before, but will note again here mostly for convenience. Here we go:

 1. I don’t and won’t use “AI” in the text of any of my published work. There are several reasons for this, including the fact that “AI”-generated text is not copyrightable and I don’t want any issues of ownership clouding my work, and the simple fact that my book contracts oblige me to write everything in those books by myself, without farming it out to either ghostwriters or “AI.” But mostly, it’s because I write better than “AI” can or ever will, and I can do it with far less energy draw. I don’t need to destroy a watershed to write a novel. I can write a novel with Coke Zero and snacks. Using “AI” in my writing would create more work for me, not less, and I really have lived my life with the idea of doing the least amount of work possible. 

 If you’re reading a John Scalzi book, it all came out of my brain, plain and simple. Better for you! Easier for me! 

 2. I’m not worried about “AI” replacing me as a novelist. Sure, someone can now prompt a novel-length work out of “AI” faster than I or any other human can write a book, and yes, people are doing just that, pumping into Kindle Unlimited and other such places a vast substrate of “AI” text slop generated faster than anyone could read it. Nearly all of it will sit there, unread, until the heat death of the universe. 

 Now, you might say that’s because why would anyone read something that no one actually took any effort to write, and that will be maybe about 5% of the reason. The other 95% of the reason, however, will be discoverability. Are the people pumping out the wide sea of “AI” text slop planning to make the spend for anyone to find that work? What are their marketing plans other than “toss it out, see who locates it by chance”? And if there is a marketing budget, if you can generate dozens or hundreds of “AI” text slop tomes in a year, how do you choose which to highlight? And will the purveyors of such text slop acknowledge that the work they’re promoting was written by no one? 

 (Answer: No. No they won’t). 

 I am not worried about being replaced as a novelist because I already exist as a successful author, and my publishers are contractually obliged to market my novels every time they come out. This will be the case for a while, since I have a long damn contract. Readers will know when my new books are out, and they will be able to find them in bookstores, be they physical or virtual. This is a huge advantage over any “AI” text slop that might be churned out. And while I don’t want to overstate the amount of publicity/marketing traditional publishers will do for their debut or remaining mid-list authors, they will do at least some , and that visibility is an advantage that “AI” text slop won’t have. Even indie authors, who must rely on themselves instead of a publicity department to get the word out about their work, have something “AI” text slop will never have: They actually fucking care about their own work, and want other people to see it.

 I do understand it’s more than mildly depressing to think that a major market difference between “AI” text slop and stuff actual people wrote is marketing, but: Welcome to capitalism! It’s not the only difference, obviously. But it is a big one. And one that is likely to persist, because:

 3. People in general are burning out on “AI.” Not just in creative stuff: Microsoft recently finally admitted that no one likes its attempt to shove its “AI” Copilot into absolutely everything, whether it needs to be there or not , and is making adjustments to its businesses to reflect that. “AI” as a consumer-facing entity rarely does what it does, better than the programs and apps it is replacing (see: Google’s Gemini replacing Google Assistant), and sucks up far more energy and resources. Is your electric bill higher recently? Has the cost of a computer gone up because suddenly memory prices have doubled (or more)? You have “AI” to thank for that. It’s the solution to a problem that not only did no one actually have, but wasn’t a problem in the first place. There are other issues with “AI” larger than this — mostly that it’s a tool to capture capital at the expense of labor — but I’m going to leave those aside for now to focus on the public exhaustion and dissatisfaction with “AI” as a product category.

 In this sort of environment, human-generated work has a competitive advantage, because people see it as more authentic and real (which it is, to the extent that “authentic” and “real” mean “a product of an actual human brain”), and more likely to have the ability to surprise and engage the people who encounter it. I don’t want to oversell this — humans are still as capable of creating lazy, uninspired junk as they ever were, and some people really do think of their entertainment as bulk purchases. Those vaguely sad people will be happy that “AI” gives them more , even if it’s of lesser quality. But I do think in general when people are given a choice, that they will generally prefer to give their time and money to the output of an actual human making an effort, than to the product of a belching drain on the planet’s resources whose use primarily benefits people who are already billionaires dozens of times over. Call me optimistic. 

 Certainly that’s the case with me:

 4. I’m supporting human artists, including as they relate to my own work. I’ve noted before that I have it as a contractual point that my book covers, translations and copyediting have to be done by humans. This is again both a practical issue (re: copyrights, quality of work, etc) and a moral one, but also, look, I like that my work pays other humans, and I want that to continue. Also, in my personal life, I’m going to pay artists for stuff. When I buy art, I’m going to buy from people who created it, not generated it out of a prompt. I’m not going to knowingly post or promote anything that is not human-created. Just as I wish to be supported by others, I am going to support other artists. There is no downside to not promoting/paying for “AI” generated work, since there was no one who created it. There is an upside to promoting and paying humans. They need to eat and pay rent.

 “But what if they use AI?” In the case of the people working on my own stuff, it’s understood that the final product, the stuff that goes into my book, is the result of their own efforts. As for everything else, well, I assume most artists are pretty much like me: using “AI” for their primary line of creativity is just introducing more work, not less. Also I’m going to trust other creators; if they tell me they’re not using “AI” in their finished work then I’m going to believe them in the absence of a compelling reason not to. I don’t particularly have the time or interest in being the “AI” police. Anyway, if they’re misrepresenting their work product, that eventually gets found out. Ask a plagiarist about that.

 With all that said:

 5. “AI” is Probably Sticking Around In Some Form. This is not an “‘AI’ Is Inevitable and Will Take Over the World” statement, since as noted above people are getting sick of it being aggressively shoved at them, and also there are indications that a) “this is the worst it will ever be” is not true of AI, as people actively note that recent versions of ChatGPT were worse to use than earlier versions, b) investors are getting to the point of wanting to see an actual return on their investments, which is the cue for the economic bubble around AI to pop. This going to be just great for the economy. “AI,” as the current economic and cultural phenomenon, is likely to be heading for a fall.

 Once all that drama is done and we’ve sorted through the damage, the backend of “AI” and its various capabilities will still be around, either relabeled or as is, just demoted from being the center of the tech universe and people making such a big deal about it, scaled down and hopefully more efficient. I understand that the “AI will probably persist” position is not a popular one in the creative circles in which I exist, and that people hope it vaporizes entirely, like NFTs and blockchains. I do have to admit I wouldn’t mind being wrong about this. But as a matter of capital investment and corporate integration, NFTs, etc are a blip compared to what’s been invested in “AI” overall, and how deep its use has sunk into modern capitalism (more on that in a bit).

 Another reason I think “AI” is likely to stick around in some form:

 6. “AI” is a marketing term, not a technical one, and encompasses different technologies. The version that the creative class gets (rightly) worked up about is generative “AI,” the most well-known versions of which were trained on vast databases of work, much of which was and is copyrighted and not compensated for. This is, however, only one subset of a larger group of computational systems which are also called “AI,” because it’s a sexy term that even non-nerds have heard of before, and far less confusing than, say, “neural networks” or such. Not all “AI” is as ethically compromised as large-scale generative “AI,” and a lot of it existed and was being used non-controversially before generative “AI” blew up as the wide-scale rights disaster it turned out to be. 

 It’s possible that “AI” as a term is going to be forever tainted as a moral hazard, disliked by the public and seen as a promotions drag by marketing departments. If and when that happens, a lot of things currently hustled under the “AI” umbrella will be quietly removed from it, either returning to previous, non-controversial labels or given new labels entirely. Lots of “AI” will still be around, just no one will call it that, and outside of obvious generative “AI” that presents rights issues, fewer people will care. 

 On the matter of generative “AI,” here’s a thought:

 7. There were and are ethical ways to have trained generative “AI” but because they weren’t done, the entire field is suspect. Generative “AI” could easily have been trained solely on material in the public domain and/or on appropriately-licensed Creative Commons material, and an opt-in licensing gateway to acquire and pay for copyrighted work used in training, built and used jointly by the companies needing training data, could have happened. This was all a solvable problem! But OpenAI, Anthropic, et al decided to train first, ask forgiveness later, on the idea that would be cheaper simply to do it first and to litigate later. I’m not entirely sure this will turn out to be true, but it is possible that at this late stage, some of the companies will go under before any settlements can be achieved, which will have the same effect.

 There are companies who have chosen to train their generative models with compensation; I know of music software companies that make a point of showing how artists they worked were both paid for creating samples and other material, and get paid royalties when work generated from those samples, etc is made by people using the software. I think that’s fine! As long as everyone involved is happy with the arrangement, no harm, and no foul. But absent of that sort of clear and unambiguous declaration of provenance and compensation regarding training data, one has to assume that any generative “AI” has used stolen work. It’s so widely pervasive at this point that this has to be a foundational assumption. 

 And here is a complication:

 8. The various processes lumped into “AI” are likely to be integrated into programs and applications that are in business and creative workflows. One, because they already were prior to “AI” being the widely-used rubric, and two, because these companies need to justify their investments somehow. Some of these systems and processes aren’t tainted by the issues of “generative AI” but many of them are, including some that weren’t previously. When I erase a blotch in an image with Photoshop, the process may or may not use Generative AI and when it does, it may or may not use Adobe’s Firefly model (which Adobe maintains, questionably , is trained only on material it has licensed).

 Well, don’t use Photoshop , I hear you say. Which, okay, but I have some bad news for you: Nearly every photoediting suite at this point incorporates “AI” at some point in its workflow, so it’s six of one and half dozen of the other. And while I am a mere amateur when it comes to photos, lots of professional photographers use Adobe products in their workflow, either because they’ve been using it for years and don’t want to train on new software (which, again, probably has “AI” in its workflow), or they’re required to use it by their clients because it’s the “industry standard.” A program being the “industry standard” is one reason I use Microsoft Word, and now that program is riddled with “AI.” At a certain point, if you are using 21st century computer-based tools, you are using “AI” of some sort, whether you want to or not. Some of it you can turn off or opt out of. Some of it you can’t.

 (Let’s not even talk about my Google Pixel Phone, which is now so entirely festooned with “AI” that it’s probably best to think of it as an “AI” computer with a phone app, than the other way around.)

 This is why earlier in this piece, I talk about the “final product” being “AI”-free — because it’s almost impossible at this point to avoid “AI” in computer-based tools, even if one wants to. Also, given the fact that “AI” is a marketing rather than a technical term, what the definition of “AI” is, and what is an acceptable level of use, will change from one person to another. Is Word’s spellcheck “AI”? Is Photoshop’s Spot Healing brush tool? Is Logic Pro’s session drummer? At what point does a creative tool become inimical to creation? 

 (On a much larger industrial scale, this will be an extremely interesting question when it comes to animation, CGI and VFX. “AI” is already here in video games with DLSS, which upscales and adds frames to games; if similar tech isn’t already being used for inbetweening in animation, it’s probably not going to be long until it is.)

 Again, I’m not interested in being, nor have the time to be, the “AI” police. I choose to focus on the final product and the human element in that, because that is honestly the only part of the process that I, and most people, can see. I’m certainly not going to penalize a creative person because Adobe or Microsoft or whomever incorporated “AI” into a tool they need to use in order to do their work. I would be living in a glass house if I threw that particular stone.

 9. It’s all right to be informed about the state of the art when it comes to “AI.” Do I use “AI” in my text? No. Do I think it makes sense to have an understanding of where “AI” is at, to know how the companies who make it create a business case for it, and to keep tabs on how it’s actually being used in the real word? Yes. So I check out latest iterations of ChatGPT/Claude/Gemini/Copilot, etc (I typically steer clear of Grok if only because I’m not on the former Twitter anymore) and the various services and capabilities they offer. 

 The landscape of “AI” is still changing rapidly, and if you’re still at the “lol ‘AI’ can’t draw hands” level of thinking about the tech, you’re putting yourself at a disadvantage, particularly if you’re a creative person. Know your enemy, or at least, know the tools your enemies are making. Again, I’m not worried about “AI” replacing me as a novelist. But it doesn’t have to be at that level of ability to wreak profound and even damaging changes to creative fields. We see that already.

 One final, possibly heretical thought:

 10. Some people are being made to use “AI” as a condition of their jobs. Maybe don’t give them too much shit for it. I know at least a couple of people who were recently hired for work, who were told they needed to be fluent in computer systems that had “AI” as part of their workflow. Did they want or need to use those systems to do the actual job they were hired for? Almost certainly not! Did that matter? Nope! Was it okay that their need to eat and pay rent outweighed their ethical annoyance/revulsion with “AI” and the fact it was adding more work, not less, onto their plate? I mean (waves at the world), you tell me. Personally speaking, I’m not the one to tell a friend that they and their kid and cat should live in a Toyota parked at a Wal-Mart rather than accept a corporate directive made by a mid-level manager with more jargon in their brain than good sense. I may be a softie.

 Be that as it may, to the extent you can avoid “AI,” do so, especially if you have a creative job, where it’s almost always just going to get in your way. Your fans, the ones that exist and the ones you have yet to make, will appreciate that what they get from you is from you. That’s what people mostly want from art: Entertainment and connection. You will always be able to do that better than “AI.” There is no statistical model that can create what is uniquely you.

 — JS

 Share:

 Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) 
 Bluesky 

 Share on Threads (Opens in new window) 
 Threads 

 Share on Mastodon (Opens in new window) 
 Mastodon 

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) 
 Reddit 

 Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) 
 LinkedIn 

 Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) 
 Pinterest 

 Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) 
 Tumblr 

 Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) 
 WhatsApp 

 Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) 
 Email 

 Like this:

 Like Loading… 

 Category: Uncategorized 

 ← A Friday Mlem For You 

 New Cover Song: “These Days” →

 65 Comments on “10 Thoughts On “AI,” February 2026 Edition” 

 John Scalzi 
 February 14, 2026, 5:34 pm 

 Oh, one more thought.

 “AI” should not be used to educate kids. It’s absolutely unreliable factually and kids are even more vulnerable to anthropomorphizing it than adults are (and adults are really vulnerable to it, even the ones who should know better). Plus who can say who is training the “AI” and what those training weights are! It’s a mess of moral and factual hazards. Keep it out of the classroom.

 Jeff M. 
 February 14, 2026, 5:40 pm 

 As my late friend Bill so often said, we’re doomed, doomed.

 And as my friend Deb says now, thank goodness we’re old and won’t have to deal with this sh!t the way younger generations will.

 Terres 
 February 14, 2026, 6:04 pm 

 I have previously watched too many “Terminator” movies to not have some concern about AI. I recognize the necessity and advantages and social disadvantages of technology, and I personally have worked in the field (of technology).My main concern now (at an admittedly more advanced age) is how it will affect my young grandchildren in their future life and how it is currently affecting us all. Interesting and thought provoking article, John. Thanks.

 Rochrist 
 February 14, 2026, 6:05 pm 

 I’m worried that the absolutely ENORMOUS investment these companies have and ARE putting into infrastructure to support their ‘AI’ will not allow them to back away, and it will be full speed ahead whether the world wants it or not.

 Lif Strand 
 February 14, 2026, 6:16 pm 

 You mentioned in your post that AI means more work, not less, for people. I agree. And that leads to another point.

 Who would argue with AI that did things no human actually want to do? Why would anyone who loves doing creative stuff want AI to do it instead? Hey, AI – wash my damn dishes! Take out the garbage! Do the laundry and fold it properly! Clean the litter boxes! That’s what I want!

 Bill Wilson 
 February 14, 2026, 6:18 pm 

 I agree with all you’ve written here, John, but I have to add something. I buy and read your books because I like the way your brain works — the way your imagination says “what if” and runs with it. In the same way, I listen to musicians who infuse their work with their creativity and intellect. I collect artwork that expresses human energy and emotion. I think of all of this as soul, but whatever it’s called, it’s central to my enjoyment. Most human practicioners of the arts fail to satisfy me. How can a mashup be worth my while?

 Mark S 
 February 14, 2026, 6:27 pm 

 “AI” should not be used to educate kids.”

 Absolutely agree. I’m not an educator but occasionally classes of middle school and high school students tour my place of employment and ask me to talk to them. Inevitably a question comes, typically from a teacher, as to what advice I’d give their students about how to develop the skills they’ll need to get into my field. The answer has always been “Read. A lot. And when you’re not reading, write. If you don’t know what to write about then write about the last thing you read. It teaches you how to think.” No2 I add “and don’t use AI to suggest ideas, structure or even individual words.

 I mean, I’m an old man so I’m pretty sure they aren’t listening and are wondering when they get to leave, but I mean well, anyway.

 Jami M 
 February 14, 2026, 6:28 pm 

 Great article! And I appreciate the last point about companies forcing their employees to use it. My company is gung ho on using it everywhere, and I am refusing as much as I can. I told my boss that for me, using it is a moral issue. The amount of this planet’s resources AI farms use for pretty much nothing, plus the potential damage to our brains (see the Harvard study, https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2025/11/is-ai-dulling-our-minds/ ) is not worth the cost to me. As an analyst, critical thinking is one of my top skills, it’s why I get paid what I do. And I can’t afford for my brain to atrophy – not willingly by my own hand anyway.

 The only thing I willingly use AI for is to take notes during a meeting so that I can focus on what’s being discussed and fully participate. But then I do have to go “clean up” the AI generated notes to ensure folks reading it after have the full understanding of what we discussed. So yeah, in some ways, more work than taking notes throughout myself.

 I recently read “The People’s Library” by Veronica G. Henry. Interesting novel about the future and our use of AI. In that future earth, the world has gone through an AI era once before and had to get rid of it, but then it creeps back in.

 Frick, Jared W. 
 February 14, 2026, 6:39 pm 

 The school district pushes use of AI in the classroom, but then still tests kids based on their ability to do math Autonomously and Independently (my version of AI).

I reckon the day is close when the computer will be able to solve 5x+7=(4x-1+8x-5)/2 for the kid as long as they set it up correctly and allow them to find the lengths of the midsegment and bases of a trapezoid.

I’m hoping we someday get the kids to use the internet for their practice and their tests and then they have to prove the computer gave them a good answer or a crap answer.

 Brian Eisley 
 February 14, 2026, 6:42 pm 

 If in the near future we see roving bands of neo-Luddites attacking water sources and power lines for data centers, I won’t be at all surprised.

 Trey Imfeld 
 February 14, 2026, 6:43 pm 

 Thanks for this essay. Your analysis is one I needed to read. Thanks for taking the time to educate me.

 Jennifer Hachigian 
 February 14, 2026, 6:56 pm 

 “On a much larger industrial scale, this will be an extremely interesting question when it comes to animation, CGI and VFX.”

 VFX artist here. I’ve seen GenAI used for low-budget productions, in limited circumstances.

 Of more interest are everyday and custom tools. ML-trained denoisers like NVIDIA Optix and Intel OIDN save a ton of render time, but no one thinks of them as “AI.”

 Weta Digital uses machine learning tools for depth compositing, character skin deformation without the cost of muscle simulation (BodyOpt), and mapping facial motion capture onto animation controls as a starting point for animators (APFS).

 Rising Sun Pictures used their in-house ML tool REVIZE for better actor head/body replacement. They used this for the intimate clone scenes in MICKEY 17 and the twin fight in SINNERS.

 Houdini, Unreal Engine and Nuke each ship with machine learning tools now, too.

 On the flip side, the animators who drew LOOK BACK (2024) deliberately left hand-drawn artifacts in their pencils (ex: underdrawing). They did this on purpose to emphasize that human beings drew these drawings by hand — that they did NOT use GenAI tools for their film. Beautiful work.

 Stephen Rochelle 
 February 14, 2026, 7:57 pm 

 I maintain that Grok has forever demonstrated one of the clearest reasons to avoid GenAI: as complex as the tech is, it is apparently terrifyingly simple to inject bias into it. See the various rants that Grok has produced re: the South African diaspora and other of Elon’s topics of interest.

 What biases are in the others? Who is able to inject those? Users should assume that their best interests have already been compromised.

 Obdurate 
 February 14, 2026, 7:59 pm 

 They (LLM’s) definitely have many strengths that people in a rush to dismiss them overlook.

 If you enjoy them, have at it. If you don’t, well , it’s a big wide world and there’s plenty else to occupy your time.

 wiredog 
 February 14, 2026, 8:11 pm 

 The generative “ai” can do all sorts of useful things, but it’s not at all creative. It requires a human with actual intelligence to tell it “Out damned spot!” when editing a photo. The LLM can summarize all my communications with my insurance company, but I have to tell it to do so. There’s a leap between what being called AI and what we can actually do.

 A lot of the AI push from the tech sector is because it’s so damn useful in that sector and all the techies see it as the hammer to everything else’s nail.

 Sarah Stegall 
 February 14, 2026, 8:28 pm 

 I am curious as to why you say Firefly may not be as clean as Adobe claims. I think Adobe’s stated model for Firefly is at least a step in the right direction: images come from the public domain, or from artists who have granted permission and have been compensated. Is this untrue? Does Adobe not ask for permission? Are artists not compensated?

 Going forward, I can see apps like Firefly used ethically to provide an income stream for artists. Not everyone can afford to pay an artist several hundred dollars for original artwork, but even writers on a tight budget can afford an Adobe license. The author gets a decent cover, the creative artists get paid for their work. Explain to me how this is a bad thing.

 Howard NYC 
 February 14, 2026, 9:40 pm 

 But mostly, it’s because I write better than “AI” can or ever will 

 however that is exactly what ScalziGPT would claim… there is no human John Scalzi, rather an AI hallucinating that it is John Scalzi as well insisting there is a provincial backwater named “Ohio” where it has a house and a wife and a daughter alongside a bunch of well behaved cats

 just look carefully for the flaws and you’ll see ’em… starting with “well behaved cats” and a “wife” not browbeating him about never cutting the lawn and buying a “church” and…

 Remi 
 February 14, 2026, 9:46 pm 

 “AI” encompasses a lot. The LLMs to date are pretty bad. But other uses? Some evidence that it’s a powerful adjunct in evaluating x-ray images. It is solving some “unsolvable” math problems. Claude has gotten impressively better at coding (personal experience and that of professional programmers). IOW, there appear to be a number of areas where particular implementations are quite useful.

 I’m not sure what the fix is, but “AI” is way too generic a term to be useful.

 Remi 
 February 14, 2026, 9:46 pm 

 “AI” encompasses a lot. The LLMs to date are pretty bad. But other uses? Some evidence that it’s a powerful adjunct in evaluating x-ray images. It is solving some “unsolvable” math problems. Claude has gotten impressively better at coding (personal experience and that of professional programmers). IOW, there appear to be a number of areas where particular implementations are quite useful.

 I’m not sure what the fix is, but “AI” is way too generic a term to be useful.

 V. R. Craft 
 February 15, 2026, 12:20 am 

 What gets me is how my personal consumption of science fiction shaped my expectations of AI…and what a huge fucking disappointment it actually is.

 And yes, I KNOW what we call “AI” really isn’t, and that’s probably why I’m disappointed. But twenty years ago, I was reading books where people had intelligent conversations with AIs, where their AIs always provided them with accurate information, and where no one ever lost their job to AI… and I thought that seemed really cool!

 Now I’m looking at “AI” and what a letdown. Thanks, I hate it.

 And as an author, while I don’t think Scalzi and other currently successful authors have anything to worry about, I also think the deluge of AI slop on platforms like Amazon is going to hurt authors who haven’t yet found their audience. It’s going to be even harder for readers to find new (human) authors.

 I remember in the oughties, self-publishing on Amazon was just heating up. There was a sweet spot for publishing your book there and actually getting it in front of people without spending a fortune on marketing, jumping through hoops, and probably sacrificing your firstborn. Unfortunately, I didn’t write a book fast enough to take advantage of it.

 And you know what happened? There were suddenly TONS of people publishing on Amazon. Some were great writers. Some were putting out poorly-written slop without editing or proofreading. People got frustrated with wading through the slop, and I don’t blame them.

 At one point, I got mad at the library for forcing me to pay the replacement cost of a book they claimed had “water damage” (it was one slight wrinkle on a page, and I know I didn’t get the book wet) and decided I would just read free books on my Kindle. I looked through what the library had on their site, but they had almost nothing I wanted to read. I looked through the free books on Kindle and downloaded some. I don’t think I found any that I liked to finish. Eventually, I just paid the library fine and went back to checking out paper books.

 My point is….this is worse than that. Because at least when people were putting out unedited slop, they still had to take the time to write it. Now? They can have ChatGPT whip up some slop in half an hour. Imagine how much more slop is going up on Amazon as I type this. Imagine how much harder it will be to find the needle in a haystack of a great human writer you want to read. I’m sad for every author trying to build an audience while competing against massive amounts of AI slop.

 Quill 
 February 15, 2026, 1:01 am 

 No, John. You do not write better than AI ever will. At some point, perhaps in two years, perhaps in seven, AI will be better at writing than you are.

 This has been something that has been in the works for all of us since 1998, when Gary Kasparov was the best chess player in the world. But despite Magnus Carlson being merely the best human chess player in the world (and incomparably worse than the AI and other computer systems), chess fans still appreciate and are awed by Magnus’ ability.

 I don’t know if that is going to be true in all fields. For example, AI is already better at programming than professional programmers. And it is quite possible that there will never again be someone who is thought of as Jeff Dean or Linus Torvalds are. AI may entirely supersede that craft.

 Literature may be more like chess than programming and, in any event, I suspect that even when AI is better at writing than any human being, it will be some years more before people turn to the AI instead of the kindle.

 Joel Kopischke 
 February 15, 2026, 1:03 am 

 Great article. Appreciate your insights and analysis.

And as some of us suspected, “AI” isn’t helping, even in non-creative fields.

 https://hbr.org/2026/02/ai-doesnt-reduce-work-it-intensifies-it 

 Annamal 
 February 15, 2026, 1:42 am 

 As a techie I’ve been able to use Copilot to generate some helpful Powershell scripts but even in Powershell (created by Microsoft) it’s prone to errors and probably should not be handed to someone who doesn’t understand the basics. With obscure problems Copilot is so much more prone to harmful hallucinations and creating much more work than it saves. Bottom line is that I think baby programmers would be much better off learning the basics first before using AI.

 Kara 
 February 15, 2026, 2:11 am 

 Thank you for point 10.

I work in corporate America. My performance review for 2026 is based in part on my learning to work with AI and incorporate it into my job function. I’d love to be able to take a moral stand and say no. But you know, I have a mortgage and a car payment and need to eat. It truly sucks to have to make this compromise but I’m not willing to tell my partner that we’re going to live in a cardboard box under a bridge over this.

 jhd3 
 February 15, 2026, 2:14 am 

 Excellent, particularly on giving a break to people forced into using these (often useless or irrelevant) tools. I’m a computer administration and networking consultant and get asked about “AI” frequently, usually by people aware of none of the ethical issues involved and who expect rather more than “AI” will ever deliver.

 I do pay some attention to Grok, as the DHHS and DoD are using MechaHitler to assist in their destruction of American society. Xitter and Grok are a playground for the worst of us, but it is prudent to keep an eye on the violently insane, whose small numbers are no comfort.

 Ralf T. Dog 
 February 15, 2026, 4:40 am 

 In my current project, I use quite a bit of AI voice but, it is a placeholder. The project involves lots and lots of audio files in lots and lots of languages. I have voice actors located and the budget to hire them but, I want a final working product before I hand it over to them.

 The project also involves lots and lots of images. I guess I could use AI to generate the temporary images but, I am just putting up images of text describing what the image will be.

 There is also lots of text that is in languages that are not my first or second language. I am using AI translation for the moment. There is a world class translation service across the street from the pub where I have lunch. When the project is nearing completion, I will be handing the text off to them and paying to have them fix it.

 There is also quite a bit of code in this project. In the past, I was not a fan of AI generated code. It was drek. Today, I am honestly shocked at the quality of code it is generating. The change has happened in the past 14 days or so. Yes, I am hand auditing every line of code. Yes, I am making sure I understand everything it does. It is making quite a few decisions that are different than what I would have done. I tend to see this when working with human programmers too. If a decision the model makes bothers me enough, I ask it to make changes and it does. Sometimes, I just make the change myself. In the past few weeks, the world has changed completely. Most people can’t see those changes yet.

 It is turning into a very interesting ride.

 Lanta 
 February 15, 2026, 4:51 am 

 I’m one of those who can’t avoid using AI at work, it’s very heavily promoted by my director. There are certain things I do find it useful for, such as taking notes in meetings. When I am working on tender responses and struggling to get them within word count, AI can be a useful tool – with the caveat that I put the AI generated version up on screen and go through it line by line deciding which changes I want to use, or use with amendments, because otherwise it absolutely will delete things that are important or conflate two entirely unrelated sentences.

 You’re very right that it can sometimes just create more work though, even for those of us not in the creative industries. I’ve had to on several occasions spend large amounts of time fixing documents after colleagues clearly put them through AI – on one occasion I had to do it twice after receiving an updated version that contained many of the changes I’d already taken out (written with the exact same AI wording and, of course, emdashes, that I’d previously deleted or reworded).

 Mr Stuart J DALEY 
 February 15, 2026, 4:51 am 

 I work for a financial services company in England. Generative AI is now incorporated into a lot of the processes, but with a major caveat – EVERYTHING must be checked by a human. Nothing is allowed to go anywhere near a client until that review has taken place – your job retention hinges on that review.

 In other words, AI is not to be trusted to do it right.

 Jim Dobrenski 
 February 15, 2026, 7:46 am 

 @brianeisley, I too have hope that 2nd amendment Americans will use their God given rights on AI hardware. Better than joining ICE.

I’m already encouraged that city and township boards are being beseeched to just say no to the massive proposed power generating plants. I’m confident fellow citizens will use NIMBY, like they have against low income housing and EV battery manufacturing facilities, to thwart AI…as well as concentratio-I mean detention centers for brown folks.

 Howard NYC 
 February 15, 2026, 8:20 am 

 “thin ice”

 nobody knowingly steps out onto it, do they?

 problem is not a three foot thick layer of rock hard ice, there it is, trying to gauge the risk to step out when it is a layer estimated to be between “thick enough” and “too thin”

 making critical decisions without reliable facts

 welcome to 2026

 AI as it is currently implemented is an unverified layer of ice with unknown flaws of air pockets and fracture lines and contaminants

 now the question is, will we all survive to reach 2027…?

 Granny Roberta 
 February 15, 2026, 9:21 am 

 I’m not in a creative field, I’m just trying to write emails to my sister. And google is now constantly in my face offering to help me “improve” without having the faintest notion what I’m trying to say. Its main idea of “improvement” is to totally remove my tone of “voice”, and to omit the joke. We’ve tried to turn it off in my computer settings and in my gmail settings, to no avail. It is incredibly annoying and distracting. The sucking up of all our electrical grid power is just bad icing on the spoiled cake. Also, I’m old and I want it off my lawn.

 Fatman 
 February 15, 2026, 9:50 am 

 @ Quill:

 “No, John. You do not write better than AI ever will. At some point, perhaps in two years, perhaps in seven, AI will be better at writing than you are.”

 Maybe – but I have a hard time imagining that.

 Chess is pattern recognition. Art is subjective. We’re nowhere near programming subjectivity into machines. Perhaps because we don’t understand it sufficiently ourselves, or maybe because that part of the human experience is not translatable.

 Over the past couple of years, LLMs have improved considerably in performing patter-recognition tasks. Their “ability” to generate prose has… remained highly unimpressive. We could argue about the reason for this, and probably get it wrong. But more powerful software has so far not led to better machine-generated fiction.

 Even before LLMs were a thing, there was certainly no consensus on who was the “best writer”, or what actually determines “quality writing”. An LLM can only analyze and regurgitate expressions of human experience (or what it’s programmed to recognize as such). Having no experience of its own, it can’t develop a writing “style”.

 Could this change? I don’t like to make definitive predictions, but it seems extremely unlikely – unless there’s some revolutionary change in how we make machines.

 The writing profession is coming under pressure from several directions – but I don’t see LLMs being one of those directions.

 FionasHuman 
 February 15, 2026, 10:12 am 

 Currently I know of one valid use case for generative “AI.” I have ADHD, and my support group includes folks who use the software to help their brains function by organizing tasks, etc. One friend is also dyslexic and autistic, and he uses the generative version for help with emails to check for the kinds of issues he just doesn’t see. There are probably many people living with disabilities that could be helped by it. But that’s no excuse for throwing it into every fucking thing.

 LJ 
 February 15, 2026, 10:26 am 

 One thing that worries me, and this is happening a lot in fanfic communities, are writers (and folks in other creative communities) being accused of using AI because their writing is more formal, or their grammar is off, or, god forbid, they use punctuation (like the infamous em-dash). And it doesn’t matter how much that author is like “Um, no, I DO NOT use AI!” once the accusation is made, that’s it. In a number of instances I’ve seen it’s more of a “I don’t like this author’s writing, so it’s gotta be AI!”

 This kind of thing goes to bad places (and is usually used against marginalized communities). Then again, I find a lot of people assume the worst instead of, you know, actually believing proof. le sigh

 Paul Lankheet 
 February 15, 2026, 10:41 am 

 As a data analyst I am pretty worried about it coming for my job. At a time when I turn 50 and all jobs similar to it evaporate

 A Different Daniel 
 February 15, 2026, 10:44 am 

 John – given your comment about your current Google Pixel, would you still recommend the phone?

 Steven Seydell 
 February 15, 2026, 10:51 am 

 For software developers, it will soon be a requirement that you are fluent in using AI to do the job. And it can be a good aid when writing software, though its generated code needs to be reviewed by a human. There are likely a number of different fields where AI will improve productivity. Do I want my art, music or literature generated by AI? Definitely not.

 Colonel Snuggledorf 
 February 15, 2026, 11:45 am 

 I am deeply, deeply grateful to have retired when I did a little over a year ago, as I’ve heard from my former colleagues that the agency where I worked has gone all-in on using AI for everything. I can’t even imagine how much of a mess AI is making of the tasks I used to perform. I am so incredibly glad that I don’t have to try to make sense of the gobbledygook it is undoubtedly producing.

 @Granny Roberta, I’ve seen the same thing in gmail, and I’m just as PO’d about it as you are. Dammit, I write in MY voice, not in AI’s voice, and no, I do NOT f ing need an AI to make my phrasing “more concise.” AI can piss the f right off, in fact.

 Cranky curmudgeon is cranky.

 Colonel Snuggledorf 
 February 15, 2026, 11:47 am 

 Oops, sorry, the asterisks I used to camouflage the F-word in my post just now apparently had a different effect on the text. Although it’s not entirely incorrect to make that particular segment of text Italic/Bold.

 FL Transplant 
 February 15, 2026, 12:41 pm 

 Serious question — But when does”good enough” become good enough for AI to be implemented?

 I was reading this morning’s Sunday paper. The ad inserts that used to fill it have all but disappeared; the one remaining is for a regional department store chain that caters to old people (I’m in my early 70s and I tell people that on the occasional times I go through their doors I’m the youngest person in the store). Their Sunday insert (targeted at the old folks who still read the dead tree version of the Sunday paper) has lots of pictures of models wearing the clothes on sale that week, both store and lower prestige name brands. How long until AI is used for pictures of people wearing $9.99 sweatshirts, women holding the handbags on sale, etc? It has to be much cheaper to us AI generated models doing that — not only don’t you pay the model, you don’t pay the photographer, lighting crew, etc. And is anyone going to really care the end result was developed using AI instead of in real life?

 My daughter’s partner is a creative who years ago had a base income photographing condos/coops/homes for sale in NYC for realtors, back in the day when listings first went on-line. Then as phones kept improving their quality (something our host has noted on a number of occasions) the real estate agents began taking the photos themselves with their phones — sure, the final product wasn’t quite as good a professionally-done photos by a professional with professional equipment and lighting, but they were 95%+ as good and free to the realtor. Now, it’s only a very small segment of top-end listings (asking multiple millions) that will have a professional photo shoot. And now even staging on-line is being done via AI — once again not quite as good as having a professional come in and work their magic, but 95%+ as good, the general public doesn’t notice the difference, and a whole lot less expensive and time-consuming than bringing in furniture, rugs, and wall art.

 When new technologies are first developed they’re usually initially adopted in two ways — first, as a curiosity for early adapters who are enthralled by something new and spiffy and are wealthy enough to through their money at the new and cool, and the low end of the market where even with all of its imperfections the new technology is still better than the low end of what is currently available. We’re seeing AI replicate this today — early adapters championing it in the same way that early adapters paid big bucks for cell phones when they were their form factor was that of a large brick and cost what for most people was more than their mortgage, and the evolving really low quality needs — modeling $10 sweatshirts for a Sunday circular.

 But as the tech is implemented it rapidly improves and starts grabbing market share for more and more upscale uses, until it becomes the norm and has essentially supplanted the previous tech. Is the $24.99 cable knit sweater on sale at your local mall as good as the hand-knit one from Ireland costing hundreds more? Nope — but it’s grabbed almost all the market.

 I’m expecting a financial market shakeout, similar to that of the dot-com bust a quarter century ago. The financial return for the literally trillions being dumped into AI isn’t there yet, and the financial markets will at some point recognize that and correct. But in the same way the internet revolutionized commerce as the tech matured and Chewy followed pets.com with their sock puppe commercials, AI is going to have profound impacts on our lives.

 Mark Scott 
 February 15, 2026, 12:59 pm 

 My company has mandated a great deal of AI-ness in our work for this year. They are also pushing us to use more AI to do our demos and presentations for us. This includes conferences, user engagements, and webinars. That’s all well and good, except it is taking away the parts of the job I enjoy the most, namely working directly with our customers and creating fun, and interesting presentations. So, I have decided to retire! An overreaction, you may suggest. Not really, I am fortunate to have saved as much as possible over the last 35 years, avoided debt, and can now at 64, retire comfortably. Hey, I won’t be hanging out on the Riviera, or any of that shit, just relaxing, and indulging in creative side projects, which could very well include dabbling harder into AI. Or not. The point is…oh, I don;t rally know what the point is. Ignore me.

 Geoffrey Hart 
 February 15, 2026, 1:45 pm 

 Interesting that you chose the term “authenticity”. I’m currently writing a book review on Micah Voraritskul’s “Human is the New Vinyl: Why Human Creativity Still Wins in the AI Revolution”, and he agrees. The book is definitely worth a look: it’s a lovely meditation on human creativity and what binds the creator to the audience and inspires the joy of creation.

 While gathering my thoughts on the book, I realized that authors of a certain vintage (like me and thee) have an advantage over younger writers for establishing the authenticity of our work: we have an extensive pre-AI publication history that establishes us as having (at least back then) been real. I imagine that modern text analysis software could quite easily compare our new works (post AI) with our older works to establish our human authorship. Or not. But at least when it comes to providing evidence that we’re real humans, not AI bots, that track record of dinosaur footprints on paper is a great blessing.

 Bob Collins 
 February 15, 2026, 2:39 pm 

 @John Scalzi You wrote, “‘AI’ should not be used to educate kids.”

 Too late. High schoolers and college students are already using LLMs to do their homework, like book reports or programming assignments. Probably other areas as well: It’s hard to keep up when everything is so fluid. Some AI companies are devising ways for their LLM tools to avoid being labelled “AI” by software checkers. So the quandry: To teach students how to use LLMs suitably or not?

 Many kids today would have trouble doing 21-13 without a calculator or fingers. There was a huge debate in the past about the use of calculators by students. Debate eventually evaporated.

 Non-LLM neural nets are proving invaluable in finding trends or internal logic in many areas like astronomy, biopsies, X-ray scans, protein folding, and so on. On the other had, LLMs are wasteful in cost, time, and accuracy. They were “cute” in principle as fancy auto-correctors but overused in billion and trillion dollar companies.

 V. R. Craft 
 February 15, 2026, 3:01 pm 

 I hate when that happens! Also, when it summarizes my emails? Like, yes, I know, I read the thing. I don’t need Google to summarize a “Hey, how’s it going?” email from a friend.

 Teh Gerg 
 February 15, 2026, 3:27 pm 

 I’ve already seen complaints from established authors that AI-generated works done by someone else have been published under their names, and the profits diverted to the fakers.

 This is not only fraud, it dilutes the quality of their own work. I hope everyone who has contributed to this fraud spends mucho jail time.

 LM 
 February 15, 2026, 3:44 pm 

 Do read terms though. Adobe’s statement is not dubious because they’ve carte blanched “licensed” the work of anyone using their product. You use it, you’re feeding their AI. My sister started the switch to another program for this reason.

 cupertino jay 
 February 15, 2026, 3:58 pm 

 it’s also worth noting/don’t forget that AI is a major contributor to literally out of control (relatively slow motion) global warming. which won’t much bother old forts of my end of shelf-life generation, and not tooo bad for the next, but [surprise] generations a’coming gonna be pulling their hair out in despair.

 r.i.p.

 Obdurate 
 February 15, 2026, 4:07 pm 

 And there it is:

 “During the company’s Q4 earnings call, Gustav Söderström revealed that Spotify had fully embraced vibe coding. AI is coming for a lot of jobs, and software developer is high on the list of those in danger. Still, it’s shocking that the top devs at Spotify haven’t written any code in 2026.”

 https://www.theverge.com/entertainment/879492/spotify-ceo-vibe-coding-developers-ai 

 Sean Crawford 
 February 15, 2026, 4:44 pm 

 If I ever I create video podcasts I won’t use AI.

 I don’t like when my Youtube feed down the right side of my screen has AI talking heads, especially when I don’t discern the falseness until I have read a ways into it, or a fellow commenter warns me.

 I hate it when the AI impersonates an actual person whom I might assume to be an expert on a topic. For example that physicist or President Clinton.

 I have e-mailed my Member of Parliament and he says they are looking into legislating against AI impersonation.

 Derek Broughton 
 February 15, 2026, 5:00 pm 

 I almost entirely agree.

 On point 1, ” I write better than “AI” can or ever will”, not to belittle your ability but i believe that EVENTUALLY AI will be able to write as well as a human, and it’s the nature of software that if it can write as well as A human, it will be able to write as well as the best human writer. I doubt that’s a controversial take from anyone in the field of computing. But we’ve had a saying for at least half a century: “we’ll have ai in the next decade (or at most two).” So, yeah, point two is entirely valid.

 As for your last point, I think the fact that you’re a softie can be assumed, but you’re dead right. I retired in 2023 and I am thankful every day that I just beat it out of there moments before AI use would be mandatory for any job in IT.

 Derek Broughton 
 February 15, 2026, 5:26 pm 

 @quill “AI is already better at programming than professional programmers. ”

 How do you figure that? I certainly know many programmers who are seeing value in using AI, but the ones who do all seem to think that’s it’s improving their code, not replacing it.

 Alicia Butcher Ehrhardt 
 February 16, 2026, 2:41 am 

 I call it ‘AS’ – and refuse to use it because I have no interest in being responsible for checking everything from each word to each reference. It LIES. How appropriate for this time in our nation.

 Hyman Rosen 
 February 16, 2026, 9:52 am 

 There is a tendency to recast AI as “things computers can do that I don’t like”. A scant few decades ago, speaker-independent voice recognition and good language translation would have seemed distant, miraculous technology. Now that they are here, they are no less miraculous.

 As far as training AI on work for which creators are not compensated, isn’t that what human artists do? Learn from what others have done, and then produce their own work influenced by those from whom they’ve learned? And of course some people have been yelling about “cultural appropriation” well before computers were doing it.

 Robert W. Cromwell 
 February 16, 2026, 10:31 am 

 “ especially if you have a creative job” – I think you buried the lede.

 I agree with everything you wrote about use of “AI” in creative/entertainment fields. I think there remains tremendous promise of LLMs accelerating science in ways yet to be fully understood or developed at this point.

 My data set of one – my daughter rebuilt a breast cancer cell model using the cancer cell data set of the lab she interned at last summer. She got the model they had from ~ 70% to 90% accurate by improving the LLM’s code. Advances like this are likely to make LLM tools trained on scientific data sets incredibly useful for fundamental research as well as related areas like medical research. And they will be no less fraught with the potential for abuse than in the creative space you work in. As another poster mentioned, having humans in the loop (and eventually using LLMs to audit/error check other LLMs) seems very prudent.

 Talia Belser 
 February 16, 2026, 11:34 am 

 Consider voicebanks, like the famous Vocaloids – Hatsune Miku and the Kasane Teto non-Vocaloid voicebank – as models of ethical AI-mediated creative tools.

 These are programs that synthesize the voice of a (credited, appropriately compensated) singer for use as a musical instrument that will sing the lyrics you program into it. Flavor Foley and the songwriter/musician/programmers in that group (Jamie P. and Lily Vane, et al) are putting out fantastic work with Miku and Teto and others “singing,” like Birdbrain, Cadmium Colors, and Weiward Romance.

 Is this artificial intelligence? Yes. Is it a spur to, rather than a replacement for, human creativity? Also yes.

 a. lee carter 
 February 16, 2026, 12:47 pm 

 Regarding point 5 and how AI probably won’t take over the world: I wish I could convince more people of this. There seems to be a prevailing attitude, both from AI proponents and anti-AI doomers (who see it as a threat to every facet of society), that any flaws in AI technology will inevitably be corrected and the technology will always get better and better, and never worse. I show people the problems with AI (the predictably cringey writing style, its struggle to render certain concepts via diffusion image models) and they just say “Whatever, they’ll iron that out.”

 I’m frustrated by this, but also sort of fascinated by it. It’s interesting that so many people (often otherwise smart people) are committing a clear logical fallacy. The rationale seems to be “Well, because this technology has improved on a linear scale up to this point, it will continue to do so infinitely into the future.” As you say, that’s demonstrably untrue with things like the newer, worse versions of ChatGPT, but people still seem to believe it.

 I think these folks are missing that (a) sometimes technological progress does have an upper limit, and (b) other factors sometimes throw a wrench into things. Supersonic passenger flight is a decent example. Concorde proved that we can fly to and from Europe in under three hours, but it failed because it was loud, expensive, and cramped, and the juice simply wasn’t worth the squeeze. Could they have figured out how to make it cheaper, less noisy, and more comfortable with enough time? Maybe, but whatever that investment was clearly wasn’t enough to make it worth it.

 I’m not sure if AI will go the same way as Concorde—the future is, notoriously, an impossible thing to predict—but I feel like the broad assumption that “it will always get better” is something people should be wary of adopting.

 TheMadLibrarian 
 February 16, 2026, 1:14 pm 

 I wait in fear of the day when Admin decides to outsource our human selectors at the library in favor of AI, not to mention the inevitable creeping in of AI-generated material. AI is good for some analysis and generation, but creativity ain’t there. Besides, we tried having ‘someone else’ do the choosing of library materials previously. It was a resounding flop and generated a lot of torches-and-pitchforks from library staff. Hopefully we learned.

 Guy Bayes 
 February 16, 2026, 1:22 pm 

 The reason why everyone is freaking out about AI at this particular moment is the model drops at the beginning of February 2026 suggest it’s starting to hit exponential rates of improvement, not linear. We may be reaching the “Accelerando” phase where AI is playing a big role in coding its next version. We will know more when we see the next drop and whether that was just a fluke

 As far as “you can’t escape it” even spell checkers and grammar checkers are using it now. The AI slop that indicates Amazon does make it a lot harder on new authors to stand out from the noise. I am sure the eventual marketing plan is to finely target books to individuals just like ads work today

 Ken Fruit 
 February 16, 2026, 1:26 pm 

 One of my questions is: Can AI come up with something new and original. Would it consider “What if the moon were to turn into cheese?” and write about the consequences? If an AI model was based only on the novels written pre-Jules Verne, would it ever come up with the idea of space travel? If an AI model were trained on only pre-impressionist paintings, would it ever create anything that looked remotely like a Monet? Or is it forever going to rearrange what it has already seen into an infinite number of permutations?

 Louis Sivo 
 February 16, 2026, 4:50 pm 

 AI is so broad it will be good and bad. I have no interest in AI generated work that a human can do much better, stories, artwork like book covers and most special effects in films. But I hear from friends of how amazing AI (Claude) is for generating code, automating their creation of presentation material that use to suck up days of work a month can now be done in an hour. Etc… It definitely will take some (or more jobs) but our society has gone through this before. Industrialization, robots in factories, now AI. We just need to adjust and help workers make the leap. I really hope that AI opens up new jobs that we can’t see yet. Finally, easy for me to say. I’m retired so I can just watch this and not be directly impacted. I use to work in IT. I would be very worried if I still was.

 Louis Sivo 
 February 16, 2026, 4:50 pm 

 AI is so broad it will be good and bad. I have no interest in AI generated work that a human can do much better, stories, artwork like book covers and most special effects in films. But I hear from friends of how amazing AI (Claude) is for generating code, automating their creation of presentation material that use to suck up days of work a month can now be done in an hour. Etc… It definitely will take some (or more jobs) but our society has gone through this before. Industrialization, robots in factories, now AI. We just need to adjust and help workers make the leap. I really hope that AI opens up new jobs that we can’t see yet. Finally, easy for me to say. I’m retired so I can just watch this and not be directly impacted. I use to work in IT. I would be very worried if I still was.

 Bill Stewart 
 February 16, 2026, 4:58 pm 

 LM – Adobe may have licensed their use of the output of anything you do with their product (I haven’t seen the terms or the product), but recent legal decisions have been saying that AI-generated output doesn’t get copyright protections anyway, so at most you’re losing the risk that their tools will upload copies that they wouldn’t otherwise have conveniently available.

 But as you said, worth looking for another vendor, especially if Adobe wants to do that with things that aren’t AI-generated.

 Bill Stewart 
 February 16, 2026, 5:08 pm 

 Mark Scott – I should’ve retired about 5-6 years ago, but there was this pandemic going on and I had family members with major health challenges and a job that let me take time to support them while paying me money, and it’s not like we could go traveling, so I stayed on longer. But the business I was in was rapidly changing, so I’d have to retrain a lot, and I was tired, and I’d already decided to go when my company decided that, after spending decades getting really good at remote work, they should throw away all that tech and make us work in our offices, and they were closing most of the offices to pay for their M&A games so I’d be reassigned to Atlanta.

 Now they’re probably spending a lot more on LLMs, and it’ll take them a few years to throw most of that away and try to replace the people they displaced before finding out they should trash most of it. (There are other types of AI – machine learning, pattern recognition – that really were relevant to our work, but LLM chatbots for things besides cover traffic, nope!)

 P J Evans 
 April 1, 2026, 2:30 pm 

 This week’s poll at NEHGS newsletter was about using AI.

I don’t use it any more than I have to, at Ancestry, where a lot of the AI-identified stuff is Wrong.

 Kathryn 
 April 1, 2026, 2:34 pm 

 Shout out to #6 – When people say AI, most don’t realize the research in the field goes beyond generative AI. The technology can be used in ways which normal people don’t see trying to do things that would make most of us cross our eyes working to understand even the highest level summary. It’s being drowned out by the tsunami of generative and its impact on us. (I don’t do the research, but know people who do and used to write those kind of summaries.)

 WHATEVER

 Taunting the tauntable since 1998 

John Scalzi, proprietor – JS

Athena Scalzi, EIC – AMS

 About the site 

 Whatever Days

 February 2026 

 S 
 M 
 T 
 W 
 T 
 F 
 S 

 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 

 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 

 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 

 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 

 « Jan 
 
 Mar » 

 Whatarchives

 Whatarchives 

 Select Month 
 September 2026 
 August 2026 
 July 2026 
 June 2026 
 May 2026 
 April 2026 
 March 2026 
 February 2026 
 January 2026 
 December 2025 
 November 2025 
 October 2025 
 September 2025 
 August 2025 
 July 2025 
 June 2025 
 May 2025 
 April 2025 
 March 2025 
 February 2025 
 January 2025 
 December 2024 
 November 2024 
 October 2024 
 September 2024 
 August 2024 
 July 2024 
 June 2024 
 May 2024 
 April 2024 
 March 2024 
 February 2024 
 January 2024 
 December 2023 
 November 2023 
 October 2023 
 September 2023 
 August 2023 
 July 2023 
 June 2023 
 May 2023 
 April 2023 
 March 2023 
 February 2023 
 January 2023 
 December 2022 
 November 2022 
 October 2022 
 September 2022 
 August 2022 
 July 2022 
 June 2022 
 May 2022 
 April 2022 
 March 2022 
 February 2022 
 January 2022 
 December 2021 
 November 2021 
 October 2021 
 September 2021 
 August 2021 
 July 2021 
 June 2021 
 May 2021 
 April 2021 
 March 2021 
 February 2021 
 January 2021 
 December 2020 
 November 2020 
 October 2020 
 September 2020 
 August 2020 
 July 2020 
 June 2020 
 May 2020 
 April 2020 
 March 2020 
 February 2020 
 January 2020 
 December 2019 
 November 2019 
 October 2019 
 September 2019 
 August 2019 
 July 2019 
 June 2019 
 May 2019 
 April 2019 
 March 2019 
 February 2019 
 January 2019 
 December 2018 
 November 2018 
 October 2018 
 September 2018 
 August 2018 
 July 2018 
 June 2018 
 May 2018 
 April 2018 
 March 2018 
 February 2018 
 January 2018 
 December 2017 
 November 2017 
 October 2017 
 September 2017 
 August 2017 
 July 2017 
 June 2017 
 May 2017 
 April 2017 
 March 2017 
 February 2017 
 January 2017 
 December 2016 
 November 2016 
 October 2016 
 September 2016 
 August 2016 
 July 2016 
 June 2016 
 May 2016 
 April 2016 
 March 2016 
 February 2016 
 January 2016 
 December 2015 
 November 2015 
 October 2015 
 September 2015 
 August 2015 
 July 2015 
 June 2015 
 May 2015 
 April 2015 
 March 2015 
 February 2015 
 January 2015 
 December 2014 
 November 2014 
 October 2014 
 September 2014 
 August 2014 
 July 2014 
 June 2014 
 May 2014 
 April 2014 
 March 2014 
 February 2014 
 January 2014 
 December 2013 
 November 2013 
 October 2013 
 September 2013 
 August 2013 
 July 2013 
 June 2013 
 May 2013 
 April 2013 
 March 2013 
 February 2013 
 January 2013 
 December 2012 
 November 2012 
 October 2012 
 September 2012 
 August 2012 
 July 2012 
 June 2012 
 May 2012 
 April 2012 
 March 2012 
 February 2012 
 January 2012 
 December 2011 
 November 2011 
 October 2011 
 September 2011 
 August 2011 
 July 2011 
 June 2011 
 May 2011 
 April 2011 
 March 2011 
 February 2011 
 January 2011 
 December 2010 
 November 2010 
 October 2010 
 September 2010 
 August 2010 
 July 2010 
 June 2010 
 May 2010 
 April 2010 
 March 2010 
 February 2010 
 January 2010 
 December 2009 
 November 2009 
 October 2009 
 September 2009 
 August 2009 
 July 2009 
 June 2009 
 May 2009 
 April 2009 
 March 2009 
 February 2009 
 January 2009 
 December 2008 
 November 2008 
 October 2008 
 September 2008 
 August 2008 
 July 2008 
 June 2008 
 May 2008 
 April 2008 
 March 2008 
 February 2008 
 January 2008 
 December 2007 
 November 2007 
 October 2007 
 September 2007 
 July 2007 
 June 2007 
 May 2007 
 April 2007 
 March 2007 
 February 2007 
 January 2007 
 December 2006 
 November 2006 
 October 2006 
 September 2006 
 August 2006 
 July 2006 
 June 2006 
 May 2006 
 April 2006 
 March 2006 
 February 2006 
 January 2006 
 December 2005 
 November 2005 
 October 2005 
 September 2005 
 August 2005 
 July 2005 
 June 2005 
 May 2005 
 April 2005 
 March 2005 
 February 2005 
 January 2005 
 December 2004 
 November 2004 
 October 2004 
 September 2004 
 August 2004 
 July 2004 
 June 2004 
 May 2004 
 April 2004 
 March 2004 
 February 2004 
 January 2004 
 December 2003 
 November 2003 
 October 2003 
 September 2003 
 August 2003 
 July 2003 
 June 2003 
 May 2003 
 April 2003 
 March 2003 
 February 2003 
 January 2003 
 December 2002 
 November 2002 
 October 2002 
 September 2002 
 August 2002 
 June 2002 
 April 2002 
 March 2002 

 Search Search 

 The Big Idea

 What's the Big Idea? Authors explaining the the big ideas behind their latest works, in their own words. See the latest Big Ideas! 

 Authors/Editors/Publicists: for information on how to participate, click here. 

 Translate Whatever

 Administrivia

 About 
 
 A Brief Biography of John Scalzi 

 Availability for Interviews, Appearances, Writing Work and Optioning Existing Work 

 Books and Other Projects by John Scalzi 

 Contact Information 

 Guidelines for Publicity, Blurbing, Unpublished Work, Story Ideas, Social Media Boosting, Guest Blogging, Charitable Solicitations, Autographing, Educational Use and School Assignments 

 Scheduled Appearances 

 Site Disclaimer, Comment, Privacy and “AI” Policy 

 The Canonical Bacon Page 

 The Scalzi Creative Sampler 

 Scalzi Enterprises · The Scalzi Family Foundation 

 Whatever Everyone Else is Saying

 B.B. on The Big Idea: Betsy James 

 B.B. on View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 Granny Roberta on The Big Idea: Betsy James 

 Staccy Minniti on The Big Idea: Betsy James 

 Bo Lindbergh on View From a Hotel Window, 9/3/26: Tampa, FL 

 Mar Saleski on View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 Sean Crawford on View From a Hotel Window, 9/3/26: Tampa, FL 

 Jay Crandell on View From a Hotel Window, 9/3/26: Tampa, FL 

 David Allen Moody on View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 Granny Roberta on View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 Granny Roberta on View From a Hotel Window, 9/3/26: Tampa, FL 

 Katherine on View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 Sean on View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 Roy A. on View From a Hotel Window, 9/3/26: Tampa, FL 

 Jennifer L Anstey on The Big Idea: Janci Patterson 

 Whatever Just Happened

 The Big Idea: Betsy James 

 View From A Hotel Window, 9/4/2026: Atlanta 

 View From a Hotel Window, 9/3/26: Tampa, FL 

 The Big Idea: Janci Patterson 

 I Am Traveling Yet Again, Please Enjoy This Photo of Fungus In My Absence 

 The Big Idea: Steven T. Gibbon 

 How to Be the Most Annoying Person at Worldcon, 2026 Edition 

 As Promised, the 2026 Hugo Award Follow-up Post 

 Also Here is My Hugo Acceptance Speech This Year 

 Reviews of Monsters of Ohio in Kirkus (Starred!) and Publishers Weekly 

 The Name of My Next Band 

 Prednisone Nap 

 Beef Fairy 

 Somnosferatu 

 Cold Elmo 

 Hospital Watermelon 

 Seasonal Triffid 

 Good Friday Bun Enthusiasts 

 Blacklight Peaches 

 Chimps and Elephants 

 The Hess Triangle 

 Random Whatever

 Click this link -- and you'll be taken to a random Whatever entry in the archive. Which one will you get? Got me!

 Subscribe to Whatever

 Email Address 

 Subscribe 

 Powered by WordPress.com .

 Theme: Profile by Organic Themes .

 Loading Comments... 

 Write a Comment... 

 Email (Required) 

 Name (Required) 

 Website 

 %d 

 