 

 Douglas Barbour- Wholeness and Balance: An Addendum 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #7 = Volume 2, Part 3 = November 1975 

 Douglas Barbour 
 Wholeness and Balance: An Addendum 

 The Dispossessed is not only an important addition to the small shelf of
 superior SF works, it is also a large and central piece in Ursula K. Le Guin's
 Hainish Universe mosaic. As I pointed out in "Wholeness and Balance in the
 Hainish Novels of Ursula K. Le Guin" (SFS 1:164-73), Ms. Le Guin uses a
 consistently paradoxical light/dark image pattern throughout the Hainish books
 plus a particular image series in each novel to render the thematic concepts of
 wholeness and balance. In The Dispossessed , the most complex novel she
 has yet written, her continuing philosophical commitment to the theme of
 wholeness and balance is revealed once more in her imagery. Indeed, the concept
 of balance enters the very structure of the novel, as chapters are balanced
 between Urras and Anarres, with the first and last chapters linking the two
 worlds. 
 In a brief note I cannot hope to do more than point out that the paradoxical
 light/dark imagery is mixed in with a number of complementary local image
 systems. It would require a long article to explore the inter-relatedness of
 these image systems, and the complex philosophical and political explorations
 they invoke. Indeed, the number of local images and the ways in which they
 reinforce each other and the total conception of the novel is one sign of the
 novel's complexity. For example, much is made of Shevek's "light" eyes
 and Takver's "dark" voice and eyes. Together, they are the yin/yang
 circle Ai points out to Estraven (LHD §19), the whole neither is separately.
 Thus even the sexual-love theme of this novel contributes to Le Guin's larger
 artistic statement. 
 One major local image—a brilliantly ambiguous one—is the wall, introduced
 on the first page of the novel. It is connected to the image/idea of the prison
 throughout; time after time the question of who is being locked out or 
 in, which side of the wall one is on, is the focus of the narrative. 
 Perhaps it is wrong to call it an image series, but Shevek's obsession with
 number—which he images in his own mind—reflects his search for a balanced
 pattern (§2). This motif includes his passionate involvement with music (§6),
 and is connected to his search for a "General Temporal Theory." The
 concept of Time which this book presents, often in a charged imagistic manner,
 is the other major thematic presentation of balance, wholeness, the paradoxical
 reconciliation of the opposites of Sequency and Simultaneity (§3). This motif
 is often tied into the light/dark imagery which connects this novel to the whole
 Hainish series. Moreover, when Shevek finally arrives at the General Temporal
 Theory, the moment is presented in terms which recall the Tao :
 "There would be no trouble at all in going on. Indeed he has already gone
 on. He was there" (§9). Is he not on the Way? 
 The Dispossessed is politically more complex and mature than Ms Le
 Guin's earlier novels; its characterization is also, on the whole, denser than
 before. The use of particular image systems to render the single concept of
 wholeness and balance is but one thread of a carefully woven tapestry. Other
 image systems, such as the wrapping-paper/ornamentation one, contribute to other
 themes in the novel. Nevertheless, it is possible to state that Ursula K. Le
 Guin, while extending her art in all directions in The Dispossessed , has
 continued to explore the metaphysical paradoxes which light and dark have
 represented in her work from the beginning. 

 ABSTRACT 
 This brief analysis of Le Guin’s The Dispossessed 
 is intended as an extension of the analysis of light and dark imagery, wholeness and
 balance, in my earlier essay "Wholeness and Balance in the Hainish Novels of Ursula
 K. Le Guin" ( SFS 1:164-73). It is important to add The Dispossessed to
 my discussion of the earlier novels because it is not only an important addition to the
 small shelf of superior SF works but also a large and central piece in the Hainish mosaic. 

 Back
 to Home 

 