 

 Rafail Nudelman- An Approach to the Structure of Le Guin's SF 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #7 = Volume 2, Part 3 = November 1975 

 Rafail Nudelman 
 An Approach to the Structure of Le Guin's SF 
 Translated by Alan G. Myers 

 I felt that the book itself had become what it treated of, i.e. a musical
 construct.—Thomas Mann 

 Ursula K. Le Guin's early work is marked by an artistic originality as
 pronounced as it is elusive. The seeming impossibility of defining this
 originality teases the imagination. It begins to seem urgently necessary to
 analyze what this aesthetic world "represents" before attempting to
 speak of what it "expresses." 

 1. The Textual Structure. The first and most obvious characteristic of Le
 Guin's early tales— Rocannon's World (RW), Planet of Exile (PE), City
 of Illusions (CI), and The Left Hand of Darkness (LHD)—is their
 interconnectedness. They have a common subject of narration—a science-fictional
 "union of space civilizations" (League of All Worlds or Ekumen) to
 which they all relate as separate episodes. 
 This is a fairly widespread phenomenon in literature as a whole and
 particularly in the "younger" literary genres. Le Guin's originality
 shows clearly already in the characteristic connections each tale has to the
 others and to the whole. It is normal in SF for a causal connection to exist
 between episodic tales: the upshot of events of a preceding episode prepares,
 directly or indirectly, the point of departure for the following tale (e.g.,
 Heinlein, Asimov, the Strugatskys). Accordingly, the episodes are in a simple,
 chronological order, and take place in a unified space. Such a science-fictional
 model of history is equivalent to a natural-science picture of the universe 
 on which the fruitful extrapolations of SF are generally based. 
 This type of interconnectedness is not the only one possible. In a series of
 adventure tales (e.g. Fenimore Cooper's, or Harry Harrison's Deathworld series),
 the causal relationships between the episodes amount, in the main, to a purely
 chronological sequence; the starting point of one tale ignores what has occurred
 in the preceding one (trivial details apart). Put in another way, the temporal
 flow becomes indifferent to the events occurring within that time: qualitative
 changes are absent from the universe of the adventure novel. Space in such
 novels is also neutral, whatever the outcome of events. Time and space have
 features of what Newton termed absolute time or empty duration and empty or
 absolute space; endless proliferation of episodes is a possibility inherent in
 the adventure-story series. 
 The disintegration of space-time is even clearer in the series of detective
 tales unified by a common hero (Conan Doyle, Agatha Christie, etc.). The
 peculiarities of that genre require a more rigid replication of the highly
 formalised structure— including the stereotyped starting situations. This
 precludes any possibility of a causal link between detective-tale episodes, and
 at the same time sharply defines their space-time. The concept of a
 "series" is purely conventional here, since any separate episode
 implies in its structure an infinite number of possible repetitions. 
 Le Guin's SF fits none of the categories so far mentioned. Looking at it one
 way, it seems to be organised on chronological principles, since the various
 tales can be placed in a certain temporal sequence. At first sight , moreover,
 they constitute a future history drawn with a dotted line—the rise and fall of
 the League of All Worlds. On the other hand, however, the starting points of all
 her tales are virtually identical (will a particular world be enabled to join
 the League?). Thus, every situation repeats the essential raison d'être 
 of the League's activities—a movement from fragmentation toward unity. 
 At the same time, Le Guin's tales are not linked as episodes of a larger
 whole either spatially or temporally. This may seem to contradict my earlier
 assertion of the possibility of a chronological order for the episodes. Strictly
 speaking, however, that ordering does not depend on any direct connection
 between the events of various tales, but rather on their indirect relationship:
 each episode, considered separately, relates to the history of the League as a
 whole. In and by themselves, Le Guin's tales are sharply isolated from each
 other. Their temporal relationship is deliberately blurred: though there may be
 some ostensible indications to the contrary, there exists no common time-scale.
 Furthermore, close inspection causes League history itself to blur out of focus.
 We know nothing of its crucial events, their course or their consequences, just
 as we know nothing of the League itself, either its organisation or its
 functions—apart from its function as a unifier of worlds. It is no coincidence
 that in LHD the Ekumen is defined as a mystical idea rather than a concrete
 organisation. What, then, are these episodes of a non-existent
 "history" about? It would perhaps be most accurate to say that they
 tell of the separate stages through which the abstract idea or process of
 unification must of necessity pass. In actual fact, the first four of Le Guin's
 tales depict, essentially, four stages in the development of this idea: a world
 being drawn into the League or Ekumen (LHD); a world in the early stages of such
 involvement (RW); a world which has virtually lost its former ties with the
 League (PE), and finally, a world torn away from the League and striving to
 return to it (CI). 1 One might note that this last episode can be
 regarded as the first part of a new cycle, a new spiral in the League's history,
 which is the Ekumen—a fact which serves to emphasize the difficulty of
 assigning any kind of definite chronology within the sequence of tales. Only the
 whole has an absolute significance, since it possesses neither beginning nor
 end. 
 The episodes' separateness in time is complemented by the isolation of their
 events in space. The worlds of the various tales are not only lost in time, they
 are also ignorant of the coordinates, the very existence of each other. The
 space which the League embraces is united and linked only in the sense that it
 all makes up the League's space; there is no unified system of coordinates or
 reference points, no grid of relative distances. The only way of defining each
 planet's position is in relation to the central planets of the League—usually
 at a monstrous distance. The events in each episode invariably take place on the
 very edge of the known cosmos, in fearful isolation from its "centre"
 and from each other; in other words, on the frontier of League territory and
 "alien" space. The peripheralness, the frontier nature of the spatial
 situation in each episode is analogous to the peculiar temporal situation. The
 stages of "League history" symbolised in the various episodes are also
 "frontier" stages. They do not cover the central areas of this
 "history," only its initial and final phases, its frontiers. 
 We begin to sense an odd law obtaining here: the particular instance is
 always and in every respect "remote" from the central nucleus, the
 whole which is being suggested; the actual sign is remote from the general
 meaning it signifies. The League is never itself shown—it is merely an
 invariable presence in the given situation. dictating an invariable type of
 reality. The League has no concrete history of its own—but the universal
 phases of its development are eternally played out in the histories of real
 worlds, making up the canvas of their events. The League is not located in
 observable space, it is always in the unreachable "centre of the
 universe"—but it is the unchanging centre of reference of each episode.
 On the common-sense level this is made clear by the fact that the universes of
 the various episodes are "simply" the same universe. But this
 simplicity is deceptive. Everything connected with the League has a suspicious
 touch of ambiguity: the very image of the League is constantly ambivalent,
 sometimes hardening into the representation of a wholly real social structure,
 then again blurring into a nebulous universal metaphysical concept. The same
 thing happens with space and time. With Le Guin, time does not flow on from
 episode to episode, since the episodes are dissociated and isolated;
 nevertheless, within the frame of each episode the time-flow is real. Such a
 peculiar, contradictory temporal reality is, in fact, a concrete instance of a
 sort of "supra-time" within which the history of the League develops,
 expanding to the dimensions of the universe's eternal history and only content.
 As for the space in each episode, it too is, like the duration, totally enclosed
 and without continuation. In other words, it holds within itself the whole
 universe, with its centre (the League) materialising, so to speak, in an actual
 world in any particular episode. The spatial reality of this world is also
 ambivalent: it is both the reality of a particular concrete world, and
 simultaneously a symbolic arena containing the whole universum with its
 unique metaphysical reality—the League, its history, and its destiny. 
 The sensation we have as if the entire universe were "fed into" the
 finite, localised, sharply concretised space-time of each episode, originates in
 the peculiar nature of the interconnection between the episodes—or, more
 accurately, in the absence of their interconnection. It is this very
 impossibility of extending local space-time beyond the limits of a particular
 given universe which gives rise to the feeling that beyond those bounds there is
 "nothing at all," that the material universe comes to an end: a circle
 of light and beyond it an impenetrable, endless darkness. The universe of a
 given episode seems to contain within itself the whole of space and to replicate
 the eternal history of all there is. Events there take on the character of
 universal laws. In each succeeding tale they unfold along the same lines—in an
 analogous area "unique in the universe," lost in space and time; it
 begins with the same, as it were hallowed situation; it develops towards the
 same conclusion. This fact can only signify one thing—we are faced with a
 universal order of things, hallowed by time, obligatory for all worlds. 
 Without losing its concreteness, reality grows more and more symbolic; behind
 it appear the lineaments of a universal scheme repeating itself in each episode,
 a general law of being, an eternally self-replicating order of things,
 "mystically" embodied in the League of All Worlds. The League is a
 unity of a peculiar kind—not the sum of its parts but rather a common factor,
 an essential constant derived from them. The universe described by such a model
 is not, of course, the non-metaphysical universe of modern science used by the
 run-of-the-mill SF. Or, to be strictly accurate, it is not only that, for in Le
 Guin's SF there is indeed a realistic foreground. Clear inspection, however,
 reveals a second dimension which we must term "mythopoetic." For it is
 in this "second universe" that objects and phenomena lay bare their
 hidden universal significance and supra-historical law of being. 
 Le Guin's SF is thus seen to be not only a narrative concerning real
 problems, but also an attempt to communicate a higher truth persistently
 recurring in all of life's ephemeral aspects. 
 But have we enough evidence to assert the existence of this universal hidden
 meaning in Le Guin's SF? So far, we have established only one of its main
 peculiarities—the replacement of the sequential linkage "from episode to
 episode," normal in any chronological series of tales (and tantamount to
 the formula "the whole is the sum of the parts") by another—distinctly
 original, it is true— radial type of linkage: "from a single centre
 towards each episode" (tantamount to: "the whole is the essence or
 common factor of its parts"). This is equivalent to the presence of a
 structural similarity or analogy of the part (episode) to the whole, as well as
 of each separate episode to any other episode. This identifies the essential
 structural principle of this SF—its thorough iconicity : in it, the
 "lower" level of the narrative form is a similarity, an image, the
 isomorphic sign of a more general or "higher" formal level. This holds
 good not only for the very highest forms of organisation—the "series of
 tales" and the separate tales. The actual world of each individual episode
 is also an equivalent or similarity—in this case, the equivalent of the
 universe of the League. Thus, lineaments of the omnipresent scheme of Le Guin's
 appear also in her narrative forms. 
 The world of each tale is formally one—one planet, in fact. The familiar Le
 Guin scheme reveals itself in that there is never in this world any actual unity—
 governmental, cultural, or any other. The planet-world is always presented as a
 conglomerate of two or more cultures, sometimes merely co-existing, sometimes
 almost inimical. Genuine unity invariably turns out to be the goal toward
 which the events of the narrative proceed; it is always—to come. If on the
 preceding level of the universe the goal of events was unity within the League,
 now the same events as it were replicate an analogous movement toward unity, but
 this time on a planetary scale. 
 The starting point too is reiterated, also on a diminished scale. On the
 previous, more generalised level, the hero or heroes acted as an element in the
 relationship of the League of All Worlds towards the individual world; he was
 the League's representative on an alien planet. Now, putting aside this mask, he
 discovers a second beneath it, exactly similar to the first: he invariably turns
 out to be the willing or unwilling representative of one of the planetary
 cultures (the planet has conditionally become "his") in the habitat of
 another, "alien" culture. Sometimes it transpires as the story
 develops (RW, LHD), but it is always presented before the plot really gets under
 way. This is all the easier to recognise since all of Le Guin's plot
 developments are of the same type—they are without fail worked out as a
 journey, a travelling through spacetime. There are fundamental reasons for this
 of which more later; even the single exception (PE) merely confirms how real
 these reasons are. The starting-point mentioned above is always presented as
 given at the moment when this journey begins. And under this mask too, another
 lurks: a man among those who are similar to himself but always
 "other." 

 The world in which the hero undertakes his journey bears a striking
 resemblance to the universe of the League. It is always a world where
 separateness, fragmentation, alienation are dominant; lonely farmsteads of
 Earthmen dotted about an endless forest (CI), aborigine settlements separated by
 enormous distances (RW) or colonial towns and native stamping grounds (PE),
 states which co-exist but are isolated by an ice-desert and a sea (LHD). The
 planetary space too lacks any unified, definite grid of coordinates or reliable
 landmarks; it is fragmented into isolated islets of life separated by vast,
 mysterious, lifeless wastes. The life islets are not only not linked, but are
 not even located relative to one another. The space that divides them is always
 and emphatically of the same type—an all-embracing forest, or similarly
 unrelieved ice, sea or snow. If life is organisation and structure, then the
 wastes that divide the islets of planetary life are the negation of life,
 shapeless, unstructured, monotonous, same. Their dead uniformity hems in the
 interspersed dots of organised existence. 
 It is quite clear that this space, repeated from tale to tale, is analogous
 to the space of the League universe: the same scattered islets of life lost on
 the rim of the universe, the same formless murk encroaching on them from every
 side and seeming to embody the principle of alienation. The space on the planet
 turns out to be an iconic sign for the universe, and is organised like it,
 according to the same, universal scheme. 
 We might descend even lower, to the space of each separate cell on the planet-worlds
 (the woodland farm in CI; the township in PE; etc.). Each succeeding level
 reveals fresh details, and the universal similarity, being expressed in other realia ,
 becomes less and less exact; yet here too it is possible to recognise familiar,
 if faded, indications. The motif of separation is repeated with unvarying
 regularity— this time the cells are enclosed by walls, partitions; visions of
 empty rooms and enormous halls appear before us, in which there live lonely
 people—usually apart from one another. Estraven's house, and the Inner Hearth
 of his father are like this (LHD), as are the houses on the forest farms (CI),
 and the habitations in the colonists' townships (PE). The Shing "City of
 Illusion" itself, with its kaleidoscope of unseen walls emphasizing the
 illusory nature of any kind of human intimacy, becomes a concentrated, almost
 allegorical expression of this apartness. The opposite phenomenon—the large
 congregations of people which appear now and again in Le Guin's pages—are most
 often purely mechanical groupings, united, as a rule, in a negative way (the
 cave folk in RW, the troglodyte horde in PE, the herdsmen in CI, etc.). Even on
 the level of human relationships one senses a certain cool aloofness, a certain
 unsurmounted distance and isolation which makes even closely bound people
 lonely; it is enough to recall the colonists' council in PE, everyday life in
 the House of CI, or the Foretellers' monastery in LHD. Man, that final atom of
 creation, usually appears in Le Guin's SF as a solitary being. Solitude is his
 involuntary form of existence. His status is equivalent, in the descending order
 of magnitude, to the status of the League cosmos, of the given planet, and of
 that islet of life where he lives and whose laws his being reflects. As a
 microcosm, man is truly similar to the macrocosm, and the same universal law of
 fragmentation which governs the life forms at all levels, rules him too. The
 "involuntary" nature of this form of existence, its unnaturalness, is
 quite obvious—it is not by chance that on every level the scattered elements
 strive toward oneness. The events of the narrative which form its plot manifest
 themselves on the level of human destinies as the movement of the hero toward
 oneness with other human creatures . 
 Thus, moving from level to level in the thematic structure, we observe a
 repeating image at every stage: a universe which has lost its unity, and is
 agonizingly groping its way back to it. 
 As for time, just as in the universe of the League there exist only local
 times, without relation to each other, and the endlessly cyclical history of the
 League itself, so, on the level of the sundered society of each planet, no other
 unified time exists except the cyclical changes of the seasons. Not a single one
 of these worlds possesses a coherent chronology of historical events; the
 reckoning of years is, as a rule, lost; the islets of life are not only
 separated in space, they are enclosed in their own local temporal flow—they
 have no common history. The sole form of historical recollection is therefore
 legend, tradition, myth, and the events in each tale, weaving into this mytho-historical
 temporal fabric, also take on a mythopoetic colouring. Behind the realistic
 meaning of the events there appears their second, mythico-universal significance
 of movement toward Oneness, as toward the natural condition of the World. 2 
 This movement will however, have to be a directed one. For normal time in such a
 world is static and merely reproduces itself over and over as inane activity,
 marked only by the elementary signs of birth and death. It is not for nothing
 that in the universe of LHD time-reckoning starts again each new year, which is
 always the year zero. Its past is legend, its future—only a sequence of
 repetitions of the past. All that lies on either side of the present, lacking
 the landmarks of historical events, imperceptibly slides into the amorphous,
 motionless temporal continuum of myth. It is not only that the time of a given
 world contains within itself the whole time of the universe; it is not only that
 the time of any part of that world contains, in its turn, the whole of its 
 time; more than this: every instant contains within itself all of time, it
 becomes equivalent to a day, a year, a century, eternity. 
 Thus, Le Guin's SF establishes a vertical hierarchy of similarities or
 equivalents: the universe—the world of the individual planet—the islets of
 life on it—the individual person. The structure of all these levels is
 organised following a single scheme, the universe can be seen in a grain of
 sand. On every level we see a World or Universe of collapsing bonds, sundered
 space, arrested time, a World frozen in amorphous eventlessness and awaiting a
 second creation—the establishment of order. 
 To a certain extent this world picture is echoed in the purely formal
 articulation of Le Guin's SF. The series of tales breaks down into major
 episodes—the tales themselves; these, in turn, break down into a series of
 episodes threaded along the plot-line; if we can regard the entire tale as being
 the journey of a League emissary, then the central episode within it is also
 seen to be a journey, in its turn resolved into a chain of episodes. In these
 transitions from level to level, the scale of the objects drawn into the events
 gets smaller and smaller. In the central episode of the "elementary
 journey" we see the most elementary entity still capable of bearing the two
 basic principles of fragmentation and oneness. Such an entity is two people .
 The hierarchy of formal articulation repeats the structural hierarchy, and the
 formal atom of Le Guin's SF, its tiniest episode and its object, coincides with
 its structural atom. Spatio-temporal movement—from one life islet to another—takes
 on, at this final or atomic level, its limit-form. Finally, such an isolated
 "islet in the universe" is simply man, each man. The way to a united
 universe goes through the reunification of people; the way to a league between
 individual people becomes a sign and equivalent for a way to cosmic unification. 
 This repetition of identical thematic structures in all of Le Guin's tales
 leads to a parallelism between their formal structures. They coincide in
 compositional construction, in plot episodes, and even, finally, in the
 regularity with which similar motifs and situations occur at identical nodal
 points in the tales. As an example of such regularity we may take the constant
 background against which the climax of the "Hero's journey" is played
 out. In Le Guin's work this is always snow, boundless snowy or icy wastes.
 Rocannon's friend and travelling companion perishes among icy peaks—through
 Rocannon's fault; Falk in CI finds his companion and betrayer in a snowstorm;
 Genly Ai and Estraven find the way to one another (and the gulf between them) on
 an icy plateau—that very ice on which Estraven will die (LHD). Snow is the
 culmination of the Way, and by that token, also of the way for people toward
 each other. Therefore, the most important human relationships, those which bind
 and sunder people, come into being on the snow—Love and Death, Friendship and
 Treachery. It is no accident—though it has a purely local significance also—that
 in LHD, which sums up all the motifs of Le Guin's SF up to that time, Life
 itself is born on the snows (see the creation myth of the first people, §17). 
 Summing up, we can say that the artistic originality of Le Guin's SF is first
 and foremost the originality of a strong musically organised form, frankly
 thrust into the foreground. The all-pervading "vertical" similarity or
 equivalence (the iconicity or isomorphic relationship of each sign to its
 meaning) and the all-pervading "horizontal" parallelism (between
 corresponding formal elements of different works) resemble musical recurrence,
 that persistence with which a pervasive theme expresses itself in variations.
 Placing Le Guin's narratives as it were one on top the other, we would find
 something resembling an X-ray picture where the coinciding elements are
 intensified and stand out more sharply, the differences in local detail are
 effaced, and the nodes and joints of the "skeletal" universal
 structure stand out against a ghostly aura of fictional flesh. These pervading
 motifs—this skeleton of concrete form—create in their interweaving a complex
 musical structure, conveying a certain message . 
 Thus, it is characteristic of Le Guin's SF that its structure becomes a sign
 of its message. Moreover, this structure is an iconic sign, i.e. the
 properties of the structure are similar or equivalent to the content of the
 message; the content of the message is translated into the language of the
 peculiar features of the structure. The essence of what is expressed is
 indicated by the nature of the means of expression; the form of the sign is its
 meaning. 
 We may conclude, therefore, that the dominating principle of Le Guin's SF—the
 repetition of the universal scheme on all its levels—is a message, expressed
 in the language of fictional structures, about the universality of a world-order
 in which, on every level of being, one finds the same laws which govern Le
 Guin's fictional world. Proceeding from the fictional structure to the Universe
 encoded by it, we can almost physically sense the way in which the sundered and
 scattered structure of a world-model, trembling in its surge towards Oneness, by
 imperceptible degrees shows forth the construction of that very World—a
 universe of disassociated, agonisingly isolated forms, ever seeking
 amalgamation. The non-fictive World which stands behind Le Guin's SF is an
 artistically organised whole where universal relationships of form obtain. Being
 universal, they are inevitably embodied in the structure of any real phenomenon
 or event, and therefore in the structure of any "true" fictional
 narrative concerning them. This reciprocal equivalence guarantees the
 possibility not only of expressing reality in fictional form, but also of
 reflecting certain fundamental characteristics of the World as a whole. 3 
 Such a fictional text, richly reflecting reality, becomes at the same time a
 sign—equivalent of the universal "Text" or universal "Laws of
 the World." 
 Furthermore, Le Guin's message concerning the World exists only in her
 creative work, taken as a whole, in all the multiplicity of its concrete
 episodes; it is not fully expressed in any particular instance. This separation
 between sign and meaning also holds true for all levels. The world of each
 planet, belonging to the general—to the League of All Worlds—is at the same
 time emphatically distant and isolated from it. The situation of each hero,
 being a sign for the general existential situation of man in the world, is a
 concrete fictional form of an extreme isolation (a Crusoe-like existence on an
 inhabitable island, solitude among aliens). The same principle of separating and
 isolating "sign" and "meaning" can be observed in the image-system.
 The invariable background for the most dramatic plot-climaxes is a monotonous
 and indifferent expanse of ice or snow. The drama is estranged by the
 indifferent background, and the feeling by terse speech—for even on the verbal
 level the distance between the sign (the word) and the meaning (thought-feeling)
 is preserved. The more "neutral" a segment of text, the more plastic
 and rich in nuance the verbal texture, leaving virtually nothing unsaid; the
 closer to the "epicentre of complexity," however, the more routine and
 ritualised the word becomes—and the more ambiguous the meaning. 
 Thus, on every level of content and form, corresponding elements—by their
 similarity to those higher placed "vertically," along with their
 repetitions and echoes "horizontally"—indicate that they belong to
 some higher generality, in which their meanings merge. By this, they escape one-dimensional
 "realism" and leave a margin of ambiguity, room for an indefiniteness
 which does not permit a living and complex thought to turn into allegorical
 rationalism. 
 These relationships of coalescence-noncoalescence which permeate Le Guin's
 universe of fictional forms make it possible to define them as symbolic forms,
 in the Hegelian sense. The fragmentation and isolation of individual forms of
 being, and the urge it engenders for amalgamation—such is the depth-image of
 the universe which this SF impresses upon us. The immanent aspiration of all
 forms toward a higher oneness constitutes a kind of cosmic Plot, a History of
 the Universe, its Way; and the plots of the separate books are the individual
 manifestations ("signs-equivalents") of that Plot. As always in Le
 Guin, these particular plots do not cover or exhaust their general meaning. In
 other words, the general is not fully realised in the particular, the cosmic
 Plot is never fulfilled. The natural "completion" of each individual
 plot is, from the viewpoint of the cosmic Way, merely a transitional stage. 4 
 The separate plots form, therefore, a meaningful series, describing the
 attainment of ever higher levels of unity for all rational life-forms. 5 
 And it is this all-pervading inner movement of one idea from tale to tale that
 sharply distinguishes Le Guin's sequence of tales from the cognitively
 "empty" character of detective or adventure series. 
 2. The Plot Structure. A proper examination of Le Guin's fictional
 structure would entail a further discussion of at least her plot and image
 structures (and in fact this whole article is the smaller part of an unpublished
 Ms. in which I examine these aspects too). Here I can only give a succinct
 approach to an examination of her plot structure. 
 The movement towards Oneness on the planetary scale is absorption into the
 League; within the planet, it is the reunification of a fragmented society; on
 the individual level, it is the striving toward fellow-beings and unification
 with them. The reunification of a world means not only the restoration of links
 within a human collective but also the "knitting together" of its
 physical space-time, since the unity of the collective presumes a consciousness
 of its spatial integrity and historic continuity. In Le Guin's work, therefore,
 each stage of cosmic history, regarded as a recurrent reunification, is played
 out as spatio-temporal movement or Journey. The spatial movement of the hero
 stitches together, so to speak, the isolated islets of life; this can be clearly
 seen in the journeys of Falk, Rocannon, or Genly Ai. The history of his
 wanderings, the temporal aspect of the journey, introduces direction and
 irreversibility into a formerly static world, since its eventual result is a
 qualitative renewal of that world; it brings into the world a fulness of time,
 historically. The hero's history becomes the beginning of history for a
 previously ahistorical world. The journey (the "means") on its space-time
 level is isomorphic to the universal Way (the "ends") which it
 embodies. The hero brings into a formerly cyclic world the ends or goal which it
 previously lacked; since the goal has to be reached by overcoming space and
 time, movement toward it becomes a spatio-temporal journey. In this way the plot
 structure takes on a resemblance to the spatio-temporal structure of the culture-hero
 myth, and through it, to certain types of later, magical fairy tale. 6 

 Le Guin's heroes have the mission of attaching a lower-level culture to a
 higher (finally—to a universal) one. Culture is here interpreted as a unity
 retaining variety (i.e. the resistance to absorption shown by all unique
 life-forms), as a structural unity—in contrast to Nature as an unstructured
 monotony. The plot structure, therefore, not only has a natural starting point
 but also a natural conclusion—the attainment of the goal; yet, Le Guin's plot
 remains in essence open-ended. Superficially, this might seem to bring Le Guin's
 type of tale close to either the detective or the adventure tale. However, there
 are fundamental differences. For in the detective tale the natural conclusion of
 the plot disposes fully of its logical subject; therefore, the conclusion is an
 absolute end to the events, a return of the universe to its equilibrium and
 order. This is only possible in a closed universe, isolated from non-fictional
 reality, such as the detective-tale universe is. Its plot has, as it were, a
 circular or cyclical character, which is correlative to the character of that
 universe. The adventure-tale, on the other hand, had no natural conclusion at
 all, since to its subject-matter—the overcoming of a given danger, difficulty,
 et sim.—a second, third, etc., danger can always be added. This results in a
 potentially infinite linear character of the plot. In each particular episode
 such a plot movement is akin to the Journey (so that adventure novels often take
 just that form), but as a whole it differs from the journey by not being able
 ever to dispose fully of its logical (as different from its accidental, given)
 subject. 
 Thus, the detective tale is both formally and logically a closed structure;
 the adventure-tale is in each particular episode closed, but in its entirety it
 is an open-ended structure. In contrast to both, the "Journey tale" of
 Le Guin's type is formally closed—i.e. a tale with a formal conclusion—but
 logically open-ended. In Le Guin's tales the initial and final situations are superficially 
 similar: Falk-Ramarren (CI) comes from nowhere and returns to nowhere; Genly Ai
 (LHD) returns to where he set out from; the colonist city (PE) has weathered the
 siege. However, essentially the end of such a Way is radically different
 from its beginning. The difference can be measured in terms of those changes
 which have come about in the process of journeying. Neither the hero nor the
 world has been left unchanged—as they would be in a pure detective or
 adventure tale. Le Guin's hero and world have by the end of each tale gone a
 part of the Way toward that Oneness the longing for which is the motivating
 force of the subject-matter. The coming about of a changed personality and/or
 changed world means that the (formally identical) starting and concluding
 situations of fragmentation and striving toward Oneness are logically or
 cognitively different: the final situation happens on a "higher"
 level. As different from the detective tale, it is not only possible but
 necessary to continue the Way. The continuation will, however, not be a
 repetition or copy of the just concluded episode, as it would be in an adventure-tale.
 We might say that we have here to do with a superposition of the closed,
 circular plot-structure of the detective tale upon an open, linear adventure-tale
 plot, resulting in the spiral structure of a LeGuinian Journey. Such a
 journey alters the world and the culture in which it takes place from a
 spatially sundered and temporally cyclic one into a connected and historic one. 
 A similarly open-ended meaning distinguishes Le Guin's plots not only from
 the formally similar "winter journey," but also from the wanderings of
 fairy-tale heroes, who, like Le Guin's heroes, describe an enormous circle
 beginning and ending in their "own" world but spent for the most part
 in alien surroundings. All such plots, involving a formal return to their
 starting point, may be described as tautological ones. Whereas myth or
 fairy tale (where the cyclic journey corresponds to the cyclic world and does
 not change its orientation) are genuinely tautological, Le Guin's tales are not
 such. Her journeys bring into the world a change, which in turn becomes the
 source of an endless movement-cum-development, a Way toward the Goal. 
 The stages of this Way are set out according to Le Guin's persistently
 recurring scheme, a specific "law of the Universe": fragmentation
 engendering an urge to union changes into a union engendering new fragmentation.
 The goal of the individual, the collective, and the rational world as a whole,
 is to attain a harmonious whole preserving the individuality of its component
 parts. In this sense, Le Guin's SF can be seen as an artistic quest—estrangement
 and cognition—for ways out of the contradictions and conflicts of modern
 fragmented culture, and is deeply committed despite its seeming a-social nature.
 The initial situations of her tales are therefore permeated with a perfectly
 legitimate atmosphere of solitude and alienation of each from each: the journey,
 as a movement toward the identity of each with all (toward the "identity of
 opposites" as Nicolas of Cusa would have put it), becomes a way to the
 self and simultaneously to union with others, i.e. from the self .
 Everything strives to retain its uniqueness, which is a mark of its individual
 integrity, and at the same time to become part of a higher integrity. This urge
 towards the union of opposites is most profoundly disclosed in LHD. As Mircea
 Eliade has observed, men would like to overcome their existential loneliness and
 be reintegrated in a supraindividual modality; what inhibits them is fear of
 self-annihilation, of the loss of personal identity. 
 The hero's quest of himself, i.e. of his separateness, is accomplished in the
 process of unification with "the other." The Way to "I" lies
 through "not-I," through the realisation of his own unity with others
 and of his opposition to everything that is "not-I," in other words
 through Culture. The plot repeats the establishing of Culture, the formation of
 a human collective. "I" and "not-I" here are merely forms of
 the most profound archetypes of human consciousness ("own" vs.
 "alien"), while the Way is a mythopoetical plot which eliminates this
 age-old opposition by altering the boundaries of "own" (while
 retaining a boundary as such, i.e. renewing it over and over again). Culture is
 understood as a unity which multiplies separateness—it merely shifts the
 boundaries between "I" and "not-I," and its limit lies in
 cosmic supra-unity. That is why the theme of a blending of cultures, which
 permeates all of Le Guin's SF, is always presented by her in the form of an
 individual human way toward the alien yet intimate other, and why the way toward
 mutual understanding always leads through a fantastic unification of creatures
 and principles. The way to mankind's unity can only lead through the involvement
 of an ever greater number of "others" in man's "I," through
 an increasing extension of the boundaries of "own." 
 Basic to Le Guin's SF is the concept that the world is (and must be) in
 essence One. Things usually separated are in fact united. The Way of the plot
 leads to an understanding and realisation of this oneness. It is quite
 deliberate that in her "summarising" tale of LHD a certain stage of
 unity is embodied in the androgyne—a creature which in terrestrial myths is
 traditionally linked with the primordial unfragmented condition of the world.
 The plot in Le Guin is a symbolic sign for such a mythopoetic Way, in L�vi-Strauss'
 sense of myth as a search for mediations between opposing orders of being—which
 is always "androgynous." This is what ancient Chinese philosophy
 expressed by saying (as Le Guin repeats in LHD): "The Yin (feminine, left),
 the Yang (the masculine, right, etc.)—this is called Tao (the Way)";
 incidentally, the ancient Chinese divinity of light and darkness was also an
 androgyne. 
 Le Guin's SF, being mythopoetic, remains nevertheless profoundly
 contemporary, since she confronts modern culture, with its absolute
 compartmentalisation and oppositions, and the mythological Origin where lie the
 sources of the oppressive fragmentation, of all that divides men and cultures.
 The whole Gethen culture in LHD is based on the abolition of the fundamental
 dualistic oppositions of terrestrial culture, connected with the division of the
 sexes; it is based on the inversion of earthly conceptions. Such an inversion or
 overturning permits the revelation of the invariants of human existence,
 independent of sexual dimorphism, and becomes an instrument for the cognition of
 earthly culture (this aspect of LHD has been examined in depth by Lem). 7 
 The mythological state—the Golden Age—appears in this confrontation in the
 role of not only the initial but simultaneously the final state—the goal or
 end of the historical Plot. Myth, as a plot, indicates the form and content of
 History—the abolition of opposites; it becomes the source of historical
 optimism. The consciousness, however, that the way is endless and the final goal
 unattainable, supplies Le Guin's books with a constant elegiac undercurrent. 

 NOTES 
 1. Le Guin's "The Word for World Is Forest" and The Dispossessed 
 were not available to me at this writing. 
 2. In this, Le Guin's SF is, as it were, diametrically opposed to that of
 Philip K. Dick where the opposite movement predominates—toward the
 disintegration of all Order and Unity, the destruction of all forms. The idea of
 having a special issue analysing these two authors seems, therefore, well
 justified. 
 3. This type of all-pervading iconicity (the equivalence of the sign to its
 meaning, the isomorphism of the whole and its parts) is characteristic of
 medieval culture. There, however, it was looked upon as evidence of the
 unsovereign nature of the real world, which was regarded as a "sign"
 of the solely sovereign supernatural reality. In Le Guin's SF the structure of
 the fictional model serves as the "sign." Reality, therefore, remains
 wholly sovereign here, while the structure of the fictional model becomes
 mythopoetic. 
 4. In this sense, Le Guin's tales differ in principle, from, for example,
 Stapledon's Last and First Men or Starmaker , where the theme of
 cosmic amalgamation is taken to an all-embracing conclusion. 
 5. See, beside the novels analysed, Le Guin's story "Nine Lives." 
 6. These journeys are, however, to be distinguished in principle from another
 type of spatio-temporal plot—the "wanderings" into a supernatural
 world, characteristic of many myths (e.g. Osiris'), medieval Mysteries, Dante,
 Rabelais or Gogol. The presence of a number of common traditional elements
 ("alien" world, "false death" and so on) does not mean that
 Le Guin is dealing in disguised myths. Professor Ketterer's interpretation of
 LHD (in his New Worlds for Old , Anchor 1974, §4] as a "winter
 journey" must be considered erroneous, despite his acute particular
 observations. A "winter journey" is always cyclic, whereas the plot
 structure of Le Guin's tales is essentially open-ended. In this openness and
 general inconclusiveness one might see the essential structural difference
 between myth as such and Le Guin's SF. Its mythopoetic aspect does not exhaust
 all aspects of its content; a mythological interpretation of its structure can
 therefore render only a partial account of it. 
 7. See Stanislaw Lem, "Lost Opportunities," SF Commentary 
 No. 24 (Nov. 1971). 

 ABSTRACT 

 Basic to Le Guin’s SF is the concept that the world
 is (and must be) in essence One. Things usually separated are united. The Way of the plot
 leads to an understanding and realization of this oneness. It is quite deliberate that in Left
 Hand of Darkness a certain stage of unity is embodied in the androgyne—a
 character linked in terrestrial myths with the primordial, unfragmented condition of the
 world. The plot in Le Guin is a symbolic sign for such a mythopoetic Way, in
 Lévi-Strauss’ sense of myth as a search for mediations between opposing orders of
 being—a search that is always "androgynous." This is what ancient Chinese
 philosophy expressed by saying (as Le Guin repeats in Left Hand of Darkness ):
 "the Yin (feminine, left), the Yang (the masculine, right, etc.)—this is called
 Tao, the Way." (The ancient Chinese divinity of light and darkness also was an
 androgyne.) Le Guin’s SF is mythopoetic yet nonetheless contemporary: she confronts
 modern culture with its absolute oppositions. The whole Gethenian culture in Left Hand
 of Darkness negates the fundamental dualism of terrestrial culture, founded in the
 division of the sexes: Gethen is based on the inversion of Earth and earthly conceptions.
 Such an inversion or overturning permits the revelation of the invariables in human
 existence, independent of sexual dimorphism. The mythological state—the Golden
 Age—is the goal or end of the historical plot and becomes a means of expressing
 historical optimism. The consciousness, however, that the way is endless and the final
 goal unattainable supplies Le Guin’s novels with a constant undercurrent of elegy. 

 Back
 to Home 

 