 

 Darko Suvin- Parables of De-Alienation: Le Guin's Widdershins Dance 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #7 = Volume 2, Part 3 = November 1975 

 Darko Suvin 
 Parables of De-Alienation: Le Guin's Widdershins Dance 

 1. The Dispossessing. My thesis is that the main thrust and strength of
 Ursula K. Le Guin's writing lies in the quest for and sketching of a new,
 collectivist system of no longer alienated human relationships, which arise out
 of the absolute necessity for overcoming an intolerable ethical, cosmic,
 political and physical alienation. 1 That this is the root experience
 present in the whole of Le Guin's opus could best be proved by an analysis of
 that whole. Here I shall have to content myself with a few—hopefully
 fundamental—indications, referring for the rest to such essays in this issue
 as Nudelman's, Porter's, and Jameson's. 2 However, it seems clear that
 such an analysis would, already in the sundered and dispersed races and
 communities of what could be called her "apprentice trilogy" (RW, PE
 and CI) no less than in its metaphorical system of coldness and depopulated
 landscapes, find an "objective correlative" of the alienation. Each of
 her novels is centered on a redeeming hero whose fierce loyalty to his
 companions and his task is an attempt to counteract the Fall of the symbolic
 territory—as is the development of mind-speech. In the apprentice trilogy, the
 hero is a stranger superior to the primitive territory. In LHD, the point of
 view of the stranger is for the first time shown as fallible, and the territory—though
 still cold and only artificially implanted with a human-yet- physiologically-inhuman
 population—has produced its own hero, the territorial traitor with a higher
 loyalty to humanity. This is exacerbated in WWF, where the well-meaning but
 sterile outsider can survive—both as character and narrative focus—only as
 part of the fertile indigenous liberation; and it is completely overcome in Le
 Guin's undoubted masterpiece TD where the hero and the territory are for the
 first time adequate to each other, since each (creative scientist-philosopher
 and classless society) is a dynamically evolving vanguard of humanity so that
 higher loyalty to humanity does not have to be treason to its exemplary
 territorial manifestation in this novel. Parallel to the evolution of the hero
 from outsider to characterological embodiment of the territory is the evolution
 of the social habitat. Except for LoH, which for reasons explained in my
 Introductory Note I shall here slight, it is a strictly non-capitalist habitat.
 It is first presented as a barbaric simplification within which direct human
 relations can still be shown as meaningful, using but already largely
 refunctioning SF and heroic fantasy clichés (in RW a mixture of Tolkien or even
 Dunsany with SF feudalism of the Poul Anderson type, in PE the abandoned colony
 and the savage onslaught, in CI the post-Catastrophe social reversion, the
 Vanvogtian two-minded hero unconscious of his superpower, the Tolkienian bad
 guys, and a decadently refined enemy city strongly reminiscent of Buck Rogers'
 place of captivity under the Han Air Lords). In LHD—the hinge and divide of Le
 Guin's opus, the novel within which she broke through the apprenticeship to
 mastery and which because of that groans under the richness of dazzling and not
 fully integrated or clarified concepts—the social habitat is not so much a
 regression to uncluttered earlier social formation, but rather a simplified
 alternative to the capitalist or commodity-economics model (see Jameson's
 article). All of Le Guin's opposed discords—foreignness and identity,
 loneliness and togetherness, fragmentation and connection, and a number of
 others all rooted in the split between I and Thou, Self and the Other—emerge
 in LHD in a thus far most concentrated and freeing form, materialized in the
 huge ice plateau of the novel's culmination. But at the same time, that
 culmination becomes a "place inside the blizzard" engendering its own
 values; the habitat has thrown up its own weavers of unification, personal and
 political—Estraven the Traitor and his appropriate successor, Faxe the Weaver. 
 Nonetheless, the fact that the ethical and the politico-religious strands of
 LHD still demand two (or three) bearers; or, that the Foretellers' religion and
 the other Gethenian myths with their metaphors of creation and still centre
 emerge as the main support unifying the novel's disparate thematic strands of
 geography, anthropology and political intrigue; or, in still other words, the
 richness yet fragmentation of the points of view, sundering narrator and hero—all
 these loose ends, though here turned to excellent formal account, admit of
 further conceptual and therefore also narrative stringency. In WWF a hero was
 found who could—at a price—unite action and reflection, world-time and dream-time,
 and show forth both vertical (relation of conscious-unconscious) and horizontal
 (relation of self and society) de-alienation. Very significantly, de-alienation
 is brought about by a liberating struggle against imperialist colonialism. Yet,
 though imperialist oppression is in our age the saber's edge of the crassest,
 crudest, and physically most murderous alienation (so that the characters of Ho
 Chi Minh or of doctors Ernesto Guevara and Frantz Fanon are quite relevant to
 that of Selver), unfortunately alienation within the all-pervading psychical eco-system
 of modern capitalism is not always so conveniently embodied in a malevolent
 Other. In everyday life within the imperial powers, the malignance of
 alienation lies largely in its insidious power to be internalized into the Self—and
 the defence of a balanced Self against death-bringing alienation of its own
 powers is the subject of Le Guin's Earthsea Trilogy . Seen from a purely
 formal viewpoint of internal consistency and stylistic clarity, that trilogy is
 her best work up to TD. But there is a price to pay for the pitiless
 simplification inherent in even the best heroic fantasy, and in particular when
 it is the parable of the Proper Namer, the artist-creator, whose lonley sin can
 only be irresponsible playing with a world whose sole arbiter he is. Beautiful,
 polished, and self-enclosed like a diamond necklace, The Earthsea Trilogy 
 thus in the end deals with what a creator (say a writer) must do in order to
 live and create, and Ged's Dunsanian Taoism seems to me at a second—propaedeutic
 or therapeutic—remove from what Le Guin is trying to write about in her SF of
 collective practice. Therefore, the malevolent alienation, which comes from the
 outside but is mirrored inside the territory and the hero, was not disposed of
 in Earthsea. Even WWF only showed the emergence of the "translating"
 or mediating hero; the territory of WWF, the forest which is the word for the
 world in the language of Selver's people, is in a static balance, a closed
 circle of unhistorical time. Selver's horizontal, collective de-alienation is
 achieved at the price of a partial vertical, personal alienation into what Le
 Guin here still calls "the dead land of action" (§2). 
 Only Urras and Anarres in TD are a twin system, able to account for the
 threats and forms of both external and internal alienation; only TD reconciles
 linear and circular time—or cosmic, historical and personal sense—in
 Shevek's simulsequentialist physics, politics and ethics. And this is, if not
 caused by (one hesitates to say, just as in Shevek's physics, which is cause and
 which effect), certainly correlative to the ideologico-political breakthrough of
 Le Guin's identifying the privileged forms of alienation as propertarian
 possession. "The Dispossessed" is already in its title so much richer
 than the territorial titles of the "apprentice trilogy" or the Taoist
 mythopoetics (somewhat hollow in "The Lathe of Heaven," and
 beautifully pivoted in "The Left Hand of Darkness") of her middle-period
 book titles. The dispossessed are those who have no more possessions, the non-propertarians,
 but also those who are no more possessed (in the Dostoevskian sense of demon-ridden)
 or obsessed by the principle of Having instead of Being, no more ridden by
 profiteering possessiveness whether applied to things, other people, nature,
 knowledge (Sabul's and Urrasian physics) or to oneself (Urrasian—e.g. Veia's—
 sexuality). From a propertarian point of view, the Anarresians have voluntarily
 dispossessed themselves of life-sustaining property, of their very planet; from
 an anarchist or socialist/communist/utopian point of view, they have rid
 themselves of the demon possession. The Dispossessed means thus literally—in
 more beautiful, semantically richer, and thus more forceful English—The De-Alienated,
 those rid of alienation both as physical reification (by things and impersonal
 apparatuses) and as psychical obsession (by demons and what Marx calls
 fetishes). The things that are in saddle and ride the reified Possessed recur in
 the imagery of barriers between individuals as well as between people and things
 on Urras—its walls and wrappings. The fetishes or idols of the obsessed
 Possessed are ideological pseudo-categories such as freedom from rather
 than freedom for (§5) and linguistic idols such as the hierarchical
 "higher" or "superior" standing for excellent (§1). Of
 course, obsession and reification are only two faces of the same pale rider, in
 the sense suggested by the fundamental Marxist category of "commodity
 fetishism" which uses the most modern philosophical vocabulary to properly
 name the most ancient enslavement or alienation of humanity. Thus, the
 ideological pseudo-categories and idols in TD are themselves also walls and
 wrappings, and vice-versa. Therefore Anarres is at least ideally committed to
 being the place of naked, open, not compartmentalized (e.g. professionally or
 sexually) and almost thingless human relationships. Its name testifies to its
 being not only the country of An-Archy (non-domination) and the negated ( an )
 or reinvented ( ana ) Urras, but also (see Bierman) the Country Without
 Things ( res ); and Urras is not only a phonetically heightened shadow of
 Earth, but the primitive ( Ur ) and stunted (only disyllabic) opposite of
 Anarres; it is the place which has not yet got rid of res . The very real
 shortcomings and backslidings of Anarres do not ultimately detract from but
 instead reaffirm the exemplarity of its original, Odonian impulse. 

 2. The New Atlantis. To pursue and perhaps clinch this argument, let me
 analyze Le Guin's latest story, "The New Atlantis" (NA). In all
 evolutionary processes, in the Darwinian phylogenetic tree, in the spiral of
 social history, or in a writer's opus, the future—the latest point to which
 evolution has arrived, and the use of that point for a retrospective—is the
 justification and explanation of the past, and thus in a sense its cause. If
 this at first sight fairly abstruse story can be deciphered by using the theory
 that the centre of Le Guin's creation is the double star of identifying the neo-capitalist,
 individualist alienation and juxtaposing to it a sketch of a new, collectivist
 and harmonious, creation, then the theory will be shown to work. 
 NA is divided into two interlocking narrations, which gradually and parallel
 to each other define themselves and their mutual correspondences. As in TD, this
 is correlative to their presenting an old and a new world—here a declining or
 subsiding and an ascending or emerging one. Analogous to the parallelism of
 physics to ethics and politics in TD, the informing metaphor of NA is the
 substitution of geology for history. The old world, the old Atlantis of NA
 rushing headlong toward the chasm which engulfed the legendary Atlantis, is a
 somewhat extrapolated USA of advanced political and ecological breakdown, rather
 similar to one of Orr's alternative futures in the 2002 of LoH, and equally laid
 in Portland, Oregon, LoH's—and Le Guin's, who lives there—"centre of
 the world"). A "corporative State," a well-identified American
 variant of admass fascism, is conjured up simply by integrating into a seamless
 governmental totality all the already existing bureaucracies: stock-market and
 unions, health, education and welfare, credit-cards and mass-media, with
 interstices for regulated and parasitic "private enterprise." The
 system makes lavish use of the 20th-Century habits of false naming:
 the "Supersonic Superscenic Deluxe Longdistance bus" is a dilapidated
 coal-burner which breaks down when it tries to go over 30 mph; the
 "Longhorn Inch-Thick Steak House Dinerette" serves meatless
 hamburgers; the All-American Broadcasting Company confidently announces that the
 war in Liberia is going well for "the forces of freedom" and peace is
 at hand in Uruguay, interspersing this with weekly "all-American Olympic
 Games" and catchy commercials for "coo-ol, puu-uure U.S.G. [i.e.
 canned] water"; and so on. Also, a repressive bourgeois legality is only
 somewhat extended to cover Solzhenitsyn-like Rehabilitation Camps and Federal
 Hospitals for dissidents, compulsory full employment, reduction of universities
 to trade schools, etc. But within this fairly standard American radical
 nightmare, whose aspects can be found in a number of SF works from Orwell and
 Pohl to Spinrad, there are two new elements. First, in the sinking world there
 is a story of the narrator's scientist-husband Simon and a group of friends, not
 too dissimilar from Shevek's group (Simon publishes in Peking!) but in USA
 rather than Anarres and, correspondingly, incomparably more repressed. Working
 illegally, they invent direct energy conversion, which would in sane
 circumstances stop the ecological breakdown and thus obviate the economic
 necessity for the corporative—or any centralized—State and its way of life.
 But the circumstances are the opposite of sane, and, though the scientist-creators
 have found how to use physical power, they have no clue to how to find and use
 political power. This typical LeGuinian ambiguity already makes the story
 superior to either the unfounded optimism by which technological inventions
 automatically save the world bringing about decentralization and similar (e.g.
 the same device in early Simak), or the gloom and doom arising from exclusive
 concentration—sometimes with an almost morbid satisfaction—on an ecologico-political
 breakdown (e.g. in Brunner's very similar environment of The Sheep Look Up ). 
 However, the second specifically LeGuinian element is embodied in the very
 composition and style of the story, and therefore much more important. It is the
 parallel picture of a new creation—alternating with the old as the Anarres
 chapters do with the Urras ones in TD—arriving at self-consciousness and self-definition,
 a bit as if Plato's or Butler's souls of the not-yet-born were being incarnated
 and were gradually defining their senses by defining their environment: an
 extraordinarily beautiful new Genesis of perception and cognition—of time,
 space, number and universe—by means of fitful lights. It is an (extremely un-Baconian)
 New Atlantis, an undersea creation which rises from a dark and cold pressure
 through mysterious tides to a final breakthrough into life. But the Genesis is,
 as always in Le Guin, an impure and ambiguous one. The light-bearing, Luciferic
 creatures announcing and inducing it are dwarfish and misshapen: "...all
 mouth. They ate one another whole. Light swallowed light all swallowed together
 in the vaster mouth of the darkness." Yet these cruel and poor "tiny
 monsters burning with bright hunger, who brought us back to life" define by
 their hungry lights the coordinates of collective space, the planes and towers
 of a city which had existed earlier but had fallen. The city is now being
 recreated through the act of beholding and remembering it, and raised by
 irresistible geological pressures. At the end, the dawn still arrives as a dark
 blue and cold, a submarine one—the awareness of light itself rather than of
 the objects lit—but the metamorphosis of light above the tops of the towers
 indicates that the city's emergence is at hand. 
 I have paraphrased the much more puzzling "submarine" strand of the
 narration as closely as I could in order to argue about its meaning in itself
 and within the whole story. Now, only second-rate writings in SF are rigid
 allegories with a one-to-one relationship of each item described to some
 dogmatic scheme. However, I would maintain that any significant writing in SF is
 necessarily analogical or parabolical—a parable being a verisimilar narration
 which has a determinable meaning or tenour outside of narration, but whose
 plausibility is not based upon such a transferred meaning but upon internal
 narrative consistency. Thus the classical (say New Testament) parable is
 ideologically closed or univocal, but stylistically always open-ended, waiting
 for the reader's application; its ultimate aim is the shock of estrangement
 reorienting the reader's perception—in modern times, making him recognize the
 alienated world he lives in. It is not an allegory in that it does not
 substitute one thing for another (in the case of NA, alienation for the dark
 pressure which had so long prevented fallen Atlantis from rising again) but sets
 one thing by the side of another , the explicit by the side of the implicit.
 Therefore, in a parable the literal narrative and the meaning "do not
 coincide, as in an allegory; it is only parallels that exist between the
 two." 3 And though the direction of the meaning is clear and
 univocal, there may be several levels of meaning; a parable is usually
 polysemous. All this seems particularly applicable to Le Guin, whose Anti-Queen Utopa—Odo (in TD)—wrote two books, Community and Analogy (her
 analogies, if I understand the Anarresians well, have four "modes"—ethical,
 physico-technological, religious and philosophical—not unlike Dante's four
 modes of allegory), and who is one of the most consciously analogical or
 parabolic writers around. What, then, does the analogy of the New Atlantis stand
 for? 
 If the story NA is to have any unity, the emerging new City must be an
 analogy—here by contraries—to the dying American society, a new republic,
 community or life-form germinating up from the depths, symmetrically opposed, as
 it were, to the perishing republic of the first strand. One key is supplied by
 the personal pronoun: the declining narration is in first person singular, the
 "I" being that of Belle, the disloyal but suppressed citizen of the
 corporate State and wife of the only momentarily freed concentration-camp
 prisoner Simon. The ascending narration is in first person plural, the
 "we" being a new community (shades of Odo!) which relates to that of
 the U.S.A. as collectivism does to individualism and also—in view of the
 cognition and color imagery—as beauty and knowledge to pollution and ignorance
 of both self and universe. The Atlantis collective has been submerged and
 unconscious for ages, just as has the idea of a true and beautiful collective or
 classless society; the Fall of Atlantis, then, is here something like the fall
 from tribal into class society and the concomitant alienation of man into social
 institutions. A condition of pristine unity is presupposed in the whole of Le
 Guin's opus as a past Golden Age; it echoes through the present alienation from
 the unsplit Ancient One in RW, through the direct, unalienated communication he
 gives to Rocannon—mind-speech (whose development is the primary red thread of
 her writing up to LHD, rather than the Hainish chronology so ingeniously worked
 out by Watson in SFS #5), to Selver's integral forest in WWF and the other
 forest-minds and tree images in her opus. But by 1975, in NA, there is a New
 Atlantis rising: the forces of de-alienation are on the rise in Le Guin's
 writing, parallel to what she (one hopes rightly) senses as the deep historical
 currents in the world. Having achieved a balance with darkness in LHD, a partial
 victory in WWF and the first large-scale victory in TD, these forces of a new
 and better creation are now ready to rise in full stature to the surface of our
 Earth. We cannot tell exactly who they are and what they will be like: we can
 only tell that they are being raised up by tides stronger than even the ultimate
 class society of the corporate State, by the slow and inexorable geological
 tides of history so to speak; that they have just begun to remember the past
 glories of their City; and that the Luciferic goads and precursors (the lantern-creatures,
 whom I would interpret as the revolutionary political and ideological movements
 of the last century or two, say since 1789 and 1917, swallowing each other up in
 fierce infighting and "all swallowed together" by the still stronger
 alienation), although themselves twisted and stunted, have awakened the new
 creation to self-awareness. 
 All this can be confirmed by the correspondences existing between adjoining
 sections of the two narrative strands. The American strand is divided into six
 segments, each of which precedes the corresponding segment of the New Atlantis
 strand; and each group of two segments from the juxtaposed strands has a
 correspondingly parallel or inverse motif. For example, the two No. 1 segments
 (pp. 61-64 and 64-66) are introductions to the world and theme of the segment—to
 American degradation vs. Atlantean creation; the two No. 4 segments (pp. 76-79
 and 79-80) present the "cold sunrise"—the invention of direct
 conversion of solar power frustrated by the lack of political power vs. the
 deindividualized blue sunrise "the color of the cold, the color farthest
 from the sun"; the two No. 5 segments (pp. 80-83 and 83-85) balance the
 American dissidents' frustrated vision of a possible New (the solar cell and its
 implications) with the Atlantean collective's wondering memory of the wonderful
 Old (the jewel-like gracious city and its implications); and finally, the last
 two segments (pp. 85-86 and p. 86) present the end of the American narrator's
 private world-cell (the re-arrest of her husband) and the nearing end of the
 U.S.A. in earthquakes combated by atomic bombs, opposed to the breakthrough of
 the new Atlantis. 
 However, one final element reintroduces the realistic, bitter-sweet LeGuinian
 ambiguity. For after all, it may be very well to know that the end of our
 creation means, at the same time, the beginning of a new and more colorful one;
 yet this is not a full consolation for our passing—for the passing of the
 courageous and well-meaning group of Simon's, and of the whole old continent
 with its future Schuberts (such as the Forrest whose compositions are also
 surreptitiously played by Simon's wife). And indeed it is the "yearning
 music from far away in the darkness, calling not to us [i.e. not to the
 Atlanteans but to the Americans—and to the reader] 'Where are you? I am
 here,'" which is echoed in the final segment spoken by the Atlanteans: 

 Where are You? 
 We are here. Where have you gone? 

 For the music of the "lonely ones, the voyagers" (like Schubert)
 called out for non-alienated man all along, through our whole history of fallen
 Atlantis. This music is not only the harmony of sounds—I would further
 interpret—but all harmony of art, science and philosophy, always harking back
 or looking forward to human unity: unity of man within himself, of men in
 society, of humanity in Earth, and of men with nature. By that same token, such
 music of sounds, concepts, shapes or formulas is a witness to the unborn
 potentialities and unfulfilled promises of the race that produced this music.
 That is why it calls to it, and not to the Atlanteans. But that is also why the
 Atlanteans' last question-segment—the end of their strand and of the whole NA,
 which is rendered all the weightier for consisting of only three sentences—must,
 subsuming as it does the voices of the old creation's music, be taken as a
 lament for lost potentialities, as an acknowledgment that the New will,
 paradoxically, be lonely without (and because of the failure of) the Old. In my
 interpretation, even the classless society, the more beautiful humanity, will
 always miss the lost potentialities of ours, all our mute, inglorious Miltons or
 unburned Brunos or 40-year-old Mozarts. In simpler and less elitist terms, it
 will always yearn for all the life-patterns lost in our unnecessary hungers,
 diseases and wars. Le Guin's future is lonely for the past, as ascetic Anarres
 is for the promises (the plant and animal creation as well as the people) of
 Urras. 
 I fail to see how else one can make full sense of NA. 

 3. The Price and the Hope. As the above analysis of NA and the elegiac
 tone (Nudelman) of Le Guin's whole opus indicate, the ambiguities never absent
 from it do not primarily flow from a static balancing of two yin-and-yang-type
 alternatives, two principles or opposites (light-darkness, male-female, etc.)
 between which a middle Way of wisdom leads. This may be an aspect or a
 "middle phase" (Porter) of Le Guin's, but I would think the attempts
 to subsume her under Taoism (which has undoubtedly had an influence) are in view
 of her development after LoH not only doomed to failure but also retrospectively
 revealed as inadequate even for her earlier works (LoH being, here again, an
 exception, but as Watson argued a purgative one). Rather, the LeGuinian
 ambiguities are in principle dynamic, and have through her evolution become more
 clearly and indubitably such. That means that to every opposition or
 contradiction there is, as Mao Tse-tung 4 would say, a principal
 aspect which is dominant or ascendant and by means of which that contradiction
 renders asunder the old, transforming it into the new. That principal or
 dominant aspect is Selver's "godhood" translating new and terrible
 dreams into a new world-time, or Odonianism, the principle of classless and
 non-antagonistic community, analogically applied to man and the universe,
 transforming the old politics, ethics and physics. The synthesis of linear,
 sequential progress and cyclical, simultaneous fullness of being into spiral
 simulsequentialist dialectics is balanced only in the way a master skater or a
 hovering falcon is—in permanent revolution and evolution, which fails as soon
 as it is arrested. And it is always a left-hand skate or swoop, a counter-clock
 helix, a widdershins dance that goes against the dominant and alienated received
 ideas of our civilization. 
 Le Guin's heretic protagonists are culture heroes, in that each founds a
 major cultural concept, translating it from unnamed to named existence. The
 ingathering of races and recuperation of mind-speech which permits the naming of
 Rocannon's World, Estraven's "treason," Selver's liberation warfare,
 Shevek's unifying ansible, Simon's direct power conversion, are such concepts.
 In the long run, they assert themselves in the Hainish universe; but not
 necessarily in the short run. Realistically, the heroes pay a stiff price for
 their victories, though the price decreases through Le Guin's opus down to
 Shevek, the first Founding Father who is also a biological father and whose
 collective or comitatus is not destroyed at the end of the story—another
 way of saying he can live on to enjoy his victory. Almost everybody else, from
 Rocannon and Falk to Selver and Simon, is an ambiguous questing figure
 "lonely, isolated...out on the edge of things." 5 

 Sometimes, especially in early Le Guin, this is almost an existentialist
 stance of envisaging the creator as necessarily lonely in the a priori 
 alien world of practice, a stance which sociologically corresponds to a
 petty-bourgeois intellectualism. Thus, an elementary text of capitalist
 economics bores Shevek, and no doubt Le Guin, "past endurance" (§5),
 as can be gathered from the political economics—what and how people work,
 cook, buy or distribute, what share of social product they create and control—absent
 from LHD and LoH, even from TD and NA, and replaced at their centre by shifting
 counterpoints of ethics, politics, and "direct contact" with nature.
 Mythology and some forms of quasi-religious (though atheist) mysticism are a
 logical ground bass to these counterpoints. This is accompanied by a deep
 distrust of organized mass politics which (though historically understandable)
 even in TD leads to such half-truths as the "You cannot make the
 Revolution. You can only be the Revolution. It is in your spirit, or it is
 nowhere" (§9), explaining why the Urras revolt is the weakest link in that
 novel. Obversely, it also means a certain naive dissolution of politics into
 ethics, as in CI which is ideologically based on the conflict of the Shings' lie
 with Falk's truth. Indeed, mind-speech itself is (as in all SF) a kind of
 individualistic substitute for de-alienation or metaphor for a unifying
 collectivism, so that the Shings' possibility of mind-lying corresponds to a
 false collectivism (politically something like fascism, Stalinism or—in its
 insistence on not taking life—Christianity)—which is why it is so
 horrifying. But this is a mystifying metaphor which translates the de-alienation
 into terms of the self rather than of the society. When the self is projected
 onto rather than taken as an analogy of the society or indeed the universe,
 narrative and ideological difficulties arise. A good example for projection vs.
 analogy are the two Portland tales, LoH and NA, the second of which seems to me
 to achieve what the first did not. 
 On the other hand, however, the insistence on personally meaningful ethics,
 on means commensurate to ends, is much more than petty-bourgeois sentimentality
 or liberalism. Though in actual practice things can never be as neat as in
 abstract planning, this is to my mind that demand of the old society, of radical
 and revolutionary middle-class (bourgeois and petty-bourgeois) traditions, for
 which the new society—or at least the movements toward socialism in the last
 100 years—has to yearn as much as the New Atlanteans do for the old creation's
 Schubert-like music. In insisting upon it, Le Guin is taking up her
 characteristic dialectical position of being the devil's advocate not so much
 against the alienated old as against the insufficiently or ambiguously de-alienated
 new. Her political position can be thought of as a radical critic and ally of
 socialism defending its duty to inherit the heretic democratic, civic
 traditions, e.g. Jefferson's or indeed Tom Paine's. This would explain her great
 ideological affinity for the Romantics and the post-Romantic 19th Century
 democrats, especially for the left-wing "populists" culminating in Tolstoi, Hugo, and Thoreau (whose Walden is the "New Canon" of
 CI). That stance has some contradictions of its own (see Jameson's essay), but
 when taken as being itself an Old Canon flowing into the New Canon of
 libertarian socialism, it represents a precious antidote to socialism's
 contamination by the same alienating forces it has been fighting so bitterly in
 the last century—by power apparatuses and a pragmatic rationality that become
 ends instead of means. Le Guin's anarchism, then, can be malevolently thought of
 as the furthest radical limit at which a disaffected petty-bourgeois
 intellectual may arrive, a leftist Transcendentalism, or benevolently as a
 personal, variant name for and way to a truly new libertarian socialism. A
 choice between these two interpretations will be possible only in retrospect, a
 few years hence; and no doubt, judging from her own spiral development in the
 last six or seven years, both interpretations of such an anarchism are partly
 right. But to my mind, in spite of elements discussed in the preceding
 paragraph, the dominant or ascendant aspect of Le Guin's contradictory ideology
 is a useful one. It not only claims for socialism the self-governing tradition
 of the citizen (as opposed to that of the bourgeois), 6 e.g. the New
 England town-meeting tradition; it is not only a politically realistic warning;
 it also shapes accurate and therefore pleasurable artistic analogies to the
 contemporary situation of the liberating New . Just as her lonely heretics,
 the forces of the New are in truth—under the terrible pressures of the
 totalizing neo-capitalist commodity-economy (see Jameson) and of their own
 mistakes and dead ends (primarily the Russian example)—in an isolated minority
 within the North Atlantic if not the New Atlantean world. Their position and
 vicissitudes seem to me to explain not only the clear-eyed elegiac atmosphere of
 Le Guin's, but also the retrenchment she austerely—almost puritanically—operates
 in all of her work, culminating in TD. This "world-reduction"
 (Jameson) is not only a reaction to the polluted American abundance and a
 realistic diagnosis of a better model of life but also the sign of a situation
 where the bearers of the New, the Lucifers, are separated from the large
 majority of those for whom this New is intended. In this situation, the aridity—like
 that of Anarres—is a retrenchment from the "living flesh" (§4) of a
 natural community, a harsh but clean acceptance of asceticism. The beautiful
 passages of Shevek's recognition of animals (§5) no less than the end of NA
 seem to me to signify that gulf of unrequited brotherhood. (In a somewhat more
 melodramatic form, the power of the clone break-up in "Nine Lives,"
 whose survivor, metamorphosed from being part to being alone, has to learn the
 lesson of alienation, surely also comes from this cluster of concepts.) 
 In an earlier article, 7 when faced with a group of 1969 novels
 including LHD, I noted that a clear group of "New Left" SF writers (a
 term that, as used here, has to do more with sensibility and world view than
 political affiliation) had emerged. If I may be allowed to repeat myself, their
 common denominator is a radical disbelief in the individualist ideology—i.e.,
 that a stable and humane system can be built upon a sum of individual, Robinson-Crusoe greeds as the measure of all values. They deal with a changed neo-capitalist
 society of mass disaffection, mass media and mass breakdowns in a perceptive
 form for which—as different from earlier SF—Joyce, Dos Passos, Malraux,
 Faulkner, Brecht and intermedia in art, or Marcuse and Mao in philosophy of
 history, are living presences though not sacred texts. Ursula Le Guin, with her
 unsentimental warm concern with collective humanism, is the clearest and most
 significant writer of this group, allowing us to recognize our central concerns
 through a detour of estrangement. Already, LHD spoke—to use the words of that
 novel—to our "strong though undeveloped sense of humanity, of human
 unity. I got quite excited thinking about this" (§8). Since then she has
 evolved through Lao Tzu to Kropotkin and Goodman. Le Guin is less flashy and
 abrasive than most other "New Left" writers—such as Brunner, Delany,
 Russ or Spinrad—and the major presences in her writing are rather poets from
 Marvell and Coleridge on, and social novelists from Dickens, Stendhal and
 Dostoevsky to Solzhenitsyn and Virginia Woolf. In a way, she is the most
 European and—in her sense of human relationships being determined by human
 institutions—most novelistic writer in present-day American SF, and the blend
 of 19th-Century Realism and a discreet Virginia-Woolf-type adoption of some
 techniques of lyric poetry with the ethical abstraction of American romances may
 account for much of her stylistic power and accessibility. Her clear and firm
 but richly and truthfully ambiguous Leftism situates her at the node of possibly
 the central contemporary contradiction, that between capitalist alienation and
 the emerging classless de-alienation. Because of that, Le Guin is today not only
 one of scarcely half a dozen most important SF writers in the world, but her SF
 parables from LHD on are to my mind among the most penetrating and entertaining
 explorations of the deep value shifts of our age. Like the basic image in her
 work, that of two different hands meeting the dark, her writings touch us gently
 and firmly, reminding us that across gulfs of otherness our brothers not only
 can but must be met. Her widdershins dance, denying alienation, figures forth a
 de-alienated humanity. That, I believe, is the basis for her wide popularity.
 Saying "no" to the old, she also says "yes" to the new—witness
 TD and NA. And if these tales were written less than a dozen years after she
 began publishing, what cannot we hope for, from her, in the future arising out
 of such a past? 

 NOTES 
 1. On alienation, see the two introductory anthologies, Eric Fromm, ed., Socialist
 Humanism (Doubleday Anchor, 1966), and Eric and Mary Josephson, eds., Man
 Alone (Dell, 1964); Istvan Meszaros, Marx's Theory of Alienation 
 (London: Merlin, 1917); and a long further bibliography in Herbert Aptheker,
 ed., Marxism and Alienation (Humanities Press, 1965), especially the
 works listed by Fromm, Paul Goodman, Herbert Marcuse, Karl Marx, and C. Wright
 Mills. 
 2. For secondary literature on Le Guin's SF see Douglas Barbour, " The
 Lathe of Heaven —Taoist Dream," Algol #21(Nov 1973):22-24, and
 "Wholeness and Balance in the Hainish Novels of Ursula K. Le Guin,"
 SFS 1(1974):164-73; David Ketterer, New Worlds for Old (Doubleday Anchor
 pb and Indiana Univ Press hb, 1974), §4 with Le Guin's rejoinder and Ketterer's
 reply in SFS 2(1975)137-45; Stanislaw Lem, "Lost Opportunities," SF
 Commentary #24(Nov 1971):22-24, with Le Guin's reply in #26(April 1972):90-92;
 Ian Watson, "Le Guin's Lathe of Heaven and the Role of Dick,"
 SFS 2 (1975):67-75; Robert Scholes, Structural Fabulation (Notre Dame
 Univ Press, 1975), §4. My thanks are due to Ursula K. Le Guin and to Susan J.
 Anderson for supplying me with some of Le Guin's own essays, which are as
 relevant as any of the above for understanding her work. 
 3. Eta Linnemann, Parables of Jesus (London: SPCK, 1966), p 26; see
 also Bertolt Brecht, Brecht on Theatre , ed. John Willett (Hill and Wang,
 1966); Rudolf Bultmann, The History of the Synoptic Tradition (Harper
 & Row, 1968); C.H. Dodd, The Parables of the Kingdom (Fontana, 1971);
 Geraint Jones, The Art and Truth of the Parables (London: SPCK, 1964);
 Abraham Kaplan, "Referential Meaning in the Arts," Journal of
 Aesthetics and Art Criticism 12(1964):457-74; Louis MacNeice, Varieties
 of Parable (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ Press, 1965); and Dan Via, The
 Parables (Fortress, 1967). On estrangement besides Brecht see Ernst Bloch's
 fundamental "Entfremdung, Verfremdung: Alienation, Estrangement," in
 Erika Munk, ed., Brecht (Bantam 1972). I have tried to apply their
 insights to SF in my theoretical essays in College English 34(1972):372-82,
 and Genre 6(1973):251-73. I cannot enter here into the ideologically very
 significant differences between various historical modes of parable, from the
 Greeks and Hebrews to our age, but I discuss a modern parable in my Afterward to
 the English-language editions of Stanislaw Lem's Solaris . 
 4. Mao Tse-tung, "On Contradiction," Four Essays in Philosophy 
 (Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1968), especially §4. 
 5. Le Guin's prefatory note to her story "The Masters," where such
 a figure first appears; see item C3 in Levin's bibliography in this issue of SFS. 
 6. See on this basic historical dualism Karl Marx, "On the Jewish
 Question," Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society ,
 Lloyd D. Easton and Kurt H. Guddat, eds. (Doubleday Anchor, 1967). 
 7. D. Suvin, "The SF Novel in 1969," in James Blish, ed., Nebula
 Award Stories Five (1970) 

 ABSTRACT 
 While Dick is a "romantic" writer whose energy
 lashes out in a profusion of incandescent and interfused narrative protuberances, Le Guin
 is a "classical" writer: her energy is as fierce but is strictly controlled
 within a taut and spare architectural system of narrative cells. Dick writes
 centrifugally, as it were in revolving sectors (say of a radar sweep). Le Guin writes
 centripetally, in a narrowing spiral (say of a falcon circling to a swoop); she delineates
 ever more precisely the same object. Dick sees a world of addition and multiplication, so
 he reproduces it in his narrative forms. Le Guin sees a world of subtraction and division,
 and she started by reproducing it. But it seems to me and to many contributors in this
 issue that with The Left Hand of Darkness she has increasingly expressed the
 complementary urge toward integration. We need seers of both the Le Guin and the Dick
 type, for their visions help us to define and thus master our common world. These and many
 other points are argued abundantly in this special issue. Yet despite the diversity of
 critical approaches employed here, no contributor attempts to integrate the Earthsea
 trilogy with Le Guin’s SF. A number of aspects of Le Guin remain to be elucidated. 
 My thesis is that the main thrust and strength of Ursula K. Le Guin’s writing lies
 in its quest for and sketching of a new, collectivist system of no-longer-alienated human
 relationships. This system arises out of the absolute necessity for overcoming an
 intolerable ethical, cosmic, political, and physical alienation. Le Guin’s heretical
 protagonists are culture heroes: each founds a major cultural concept, translating it from
 unnamed to named existence. The ingathering of races and recuperation of mind-speech which
 permits the naming of Rocannon’s World, Estraven’s "treason,"
 Selver’s liberation warfare, Shevek’s unifying ansible, and Simon’s direct
 power conversion, are all such concepts. In the long run, culture heroes and their
 discoveries assert themselves in the Hainish universe, but not necessarily in the short
 run. Realistically, the heroes pay a stiff price for their victories, though the price
 decreases through Le Guin’s opus down to Shevek, the first Founding Father who is
 also a biological father and whose collective or comitatus is not destroyed at the end of
 the story—another way of saying he can live on and enjoy his victory. Almost
 everybody else, from Roncannon and Falk to Selver and Simon, is an ambiguous questing
 figure, "lonely, isolated,. . .out on the edge of things" (Le Guin, "The
 Masters"). Among the texts considered are "The New Atlantis," The
 Dispossessed , The Left Hand of Darkness , and Le Guin’s "apprentice
 trilogy" : Rocannon’s World , Planet of Exile , and City of
 Illusions. 

 Back
 to Home 

 