 

 Ian Watson- The Forest as Metaphor for Mind: "The Word for World is 
Forest" and "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow" 

 Science Fiction Studies 

 #7 = Volume 2, Part 3 = November 1975 

 Ian Watson 
 The Forest as Metaphor for Mind: "The Word for
 World is Forest" and "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow" 
 In the Afterword to "The Word for World is Forest" (WWF) Le Guin
 remarks that writing this story was "like taking dictation from a boss with
 ulcers. What I wanted to write about was the forest and the dream; that is, I
 wanted to describe a certain ecology from within, and to play with some of
 Hadfield's and Dement's ideas about the function of dreaming-sleep and the uses
 of dream. But the boss wanted to talk about the destruction of ecological
 balance and the rejection of emotional balance." The story accordingly
 describes the conflict between the forest-dwelling natives of the planet Athshe—who
 possess a sane and balanced, if (to a prejudiced eye) "primitive,"
 social order—and the Terran colonists who exploit and brutalize them and their
 world. 
 The Terrans, having already reduced Earth to a poisoned wasteland, regard the
 forests of Athshe purely as a source of lumber, and the native Athsheans as a
 pool of slave labour. The Bureau of Colonial Administration on Earth may issue
 benevolent guidelines, and a hilfer (high intelligence life form specialist)
 such as Raj Lyubov be genuinely concerned with native welfare, woodlands and
 wildlife; but, till the coming of the ansible instantaneous transmitter, there
 is no means of investigating complaints or introducing reforms within less than
 half a century. Thus the tone is set by the Terran military on Athshe,
 represented at its most paranoid and oppressive by Colonel Davidson. "They
 bring defoliation and they call it peace," to amend Tacitus. 1 

 The analogy between Terran conduct on Athshe and the American intervention in
 Vietnam is explicit, ironically underlined by the provenance of Earth's Colonel
 Dongh—and a considerable relief from other reflections of America's war
 experiences in SF, which, albeit the moral is one of futility and savagery,
 nevertheless frequently intoxicate the reader with the gung-ho mood of combat and
 the lavishly presented technology per se (as in Joe Haldeman's widely
 admired set of stories, collected as The Forever War ). 2 At the
 same time, the obvious Vietnam analogy should not blind one to other relevant
 contemporary analogies—the genocide of the Guyaki Indians of Paraguay, or the
 genocide and deforestation along the Trans-Amazon Highway in Brazil, or even the
 general destruction of rain-forest habitats from Indonesia to Costa Rica. Le
 Guin's story is multi-applicable—and multi-faceted. 
 The political facet aside, WWF is a vivid presentation of the dynamics of a
 sane society which lives in harmony with its natural environment becaue its
 members are themselves in psychological equilibrium. The Athsheans practice
 conscious dream control, 3 and having thereby free access to their own
 subconscious processes, do not suffer from the divorce that Terrans exemplify
 between subconscious urges and conscious rationalizations. To the Athsheans, the
 Terrans—deprived of this dream knowledge—seem to be an insane people, their
 closest approach to self-knowledge being the undisciplined confusion brought on
 by the hallucinogens they entertain themselves with obsessively (the "drug
 problem" faced by American forces in Vietnam is here savagely presented as
 the military norm). 4 

 The Athsheans' proficiency in the dream life is directly imaged by their
 physical residence in the dark tangled forests of the planet: these latter
 function metaphorically as a kind of external collective unconscious. The
 Terrans, whose unconscious is an impenetrable jungle in which they are far from
 being at home, react to the Athshean forest with confusion, fear and dislike.
 Deforestation is their technological response to the mysteries of the wood.
 Indeed, one might fairly argue that the metaphorical significance of the Terran
 deforestation is primary and the economic or factual significance quite
 secondary: 

 men were here now to end the darkness, and turn the tree-jumble into
 clean sawn planks, more prized on Earth than gold. Literally, because gold
 could be got from seawater and from under the Antarctic ice, but wood could
 not; wood came only from trees. And it was a really necessary luxury on
 Earth. (§1) 

 The paradox of "necessary luxury" neatly encapsulates the confused
 thinking of the Terrans, and goes some way towards explaining the essential
 implausibility of hauling loads of wood over a distance of 27 light years; but
 on balance, just as the metaphorical sense precedes the economic in this
 passage, so it does in the story as a whole, intensely verisimilar though the
 story is in presentation. 
 The metaphorical structure operates on a primary opposition of light and
 darkness: the arid light outside the forests, where the aggressive and
 exploitative Terrans feel falsely safe, and the shiftingly many-coloured
 darkness within, where the integral Athsheans wake and dream. The forest paths
 are "devious as nerves" (§2)—a neural simile which supports the
 impression that the forest itself is conscious; that it represents the
 subconscious mind, the dark side of awareness. Being tangled and dark, no
 superficial reconnaissance of it is possible—no fast overflight surveys
 beloved of Herman Kahn's "flying think tanks" (Kahn's thermonuclear
 catechism is rehearsed by the rabid Colonel Davidson, reflecting "by God
 sometimes you have to be able to think about the unthinkable" [§7]).
 "Nothing was pure, dry, arid, plain. Revelation was lacking. There was no
 seeing everything at once, no certainty" (§2). Lyubov, initially oppressed
 by the world-forest with its impenetrability and "total vegetable
 indifference to the presence of mind" (§5), eventually comes to terms with
 the forest (and its implications), and reflects that, whereas the name
 "terra" designates the soil of his own world, "to the Athsheans
 soil, ground, earth was not that to which the dead return and by which the
 living live: the substance of their world was not earth, but forest. Terran man
 was clay, red dust. Athshean man was branch and root" (§5). The Athshean
 word for "dream," indeed, is the same as the word for
 "root." 
 Out of the original impetus to write about forest and dream, then, has come a
 world-forest that—while nonsentient itself—nevertheless functions
 metaphorically as mind: as the collective unconscious mind of the Athsheans.
 However, the story (at "the boss's" behests) is oriented politically
 and ecologically; hence it must be primarily verisimilar rather than
 metaphorical. Consequently there is a surplus of energy and idea, attached to
 the central image of a forest consciousness, which cannot find a full outlet
 here. At the same time, WWF is exploring an alternative state of consciousness,
 in the conscious dream; yet this is not a paranormal state of mind—something
 which Le Guin has treated extensively in her previous Hainish-cycle works. The
 "Forest mind" theme, controlled and tempered to politics and ecology
 in WWF, finds its independent outlet only within a paranormal context, in
 another long story of this period, "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow"
 (VTE). The two stories are closely linked thematically—the latter involving a
 general inversion of the situation of the former. If, as I suggest in SFS #5, Le
 Guin's 1971 novel The Lathe of Heaven represents a discharge of
 paranormal elements built into the framework of the Hainish cycle, then, outside
 of that cycle, VTE represents a parallel working-out of a conflict between
 verisimilitude and metaphor in WWF. VTE uses the paranormal element from the
 Hainish cycle as a way of validating a forest-mind which is a verisimilar
 actuality rather than a metaphor. 
 Whilst Earthmen in general are regarded as insane by the Athsheans, the
 Extreme Survey team of the second story are of unsound mind by the standards of
 Earth—and Hain, and any other world. Only people who are radically alienated
 from society would volunteer for a trip lasting five hundred years, objective
 time. 5 The most alienated of them, Osden, is paradoxically an empath.
 He possesses the paranormal skill "to pick up emotion or sentience from
 anything that felt." Unfortunately, the feelings of his fellows only serve
 to disgust him. Le Guin adds that properly speaking this faculty could be
 categorised as a "wide-range bioempathic receptivity"—which seems to
 be a way of suggesting that this is not in fact a paranormal skill, comparable
 to telepathy, since all human beings possess a certain degree of what can only
 be termed, "bioempathic receptivity" in relation to kinesic body-signals
 and pheromone scent-signals (even though most of the time they are unaware of
 this consciously). However, the fact that a teachable technique for telepathy
 exists (on Rocannon's World, otherwise Fomalhaut II—locale of Le Guin's first
 Hainish novel) is deliberately introduced into the story at this point, to rout
 the skeptic voice that would separate empathy off from telepathy. As the events
 of the novel Rocannon's World are supposed to take place some 300 years
 after the events of this story, the paranormal comparison is conceivably more
 important than strict adherence to chronology. But in any case, sharing
 "lust with a white rat, pain with a squashed cockroach and phototropy with
 a moth" is hardly classifiable as a natural talent. Clearly this represents
 a qualitative leap into the beyond of the paranormal—a movement away from a
 mere extension of everyday (if rarely noted) experience, to a radically
 different level of perception. 
 The psychological disconnectedness of the VTE survey team contrasts sharply
 with the total connectedness of the vegetation on World 4470. There is nothing
 but vegetation on this world—tree, creeper, grass; but no bird or beast,
 nothing that moves. The interconnected roots amid creepers function as slow
 neural pathways binding the whole complex of forest and prairie into a slow
 vegetable consciousness, whose awareness is a function of this connectedness. 
 It is aware; yet not intelligent. Slowly realizing the presence of rootless,
 mobile intruders in its midst, the vegetable mind reacts with an anxiety that
 grows to terror in the minds of the survey team as they sense it, and which is
 only absorbed and transcended by the empath Osden. His only psychological
 defence against the flood of feelings from others, that threaten to swamp his
 own personality, is to reject these others, and then masochistically thrive on
 his own rejection by others which this provokes. Thus rejection becomes his
 salvation. 
 One might clearly relate Le Guin's use of the forest as metaphor for a mental
 state to Henry James' use of a similar image in his story "The Beast in the
 Jungle." 6 Not only does a lurking "psychic beast" lie
 in wait for James' protagonist John Marcher, to be sensed also by Le Guin's
 Porlock as "something moving with purpose, trying to attack him from
 behind." Not only does John Marcher's response, of hurling himself
 violently face-down in his hallucination, as though he has been physically leapt
 upon, pre-echo what happens to Le Guin's Osden. But even the very nature of
 Marcher's beast—which represents a lifelong atrophy of affect, of emotional
 cathexis with other people and the outside world—parallels Osden's autism. 
 At the same time, one can find in previous SF several "forest-minds"
 and vegetable intelligences. Perhaps the most lucid and insightful are Olaf
 Stapledon's Plant Men in Star Maker (1937; §7:3). Stapledon's
 "vegetable humanities" are specifically associated with the mystical,
 and even the redemptory. ("Till sunset he slept, not in a dreamless sleep,
 but in a sort of trance, the meditative and mystical quality of which was to
 prove in future ages a well of peace for many worlds.") Stapledon is here
 closest to Le Guin in mood of the various arboriculturists of SF—and it is
 Stapledon, that mystical atheist, who remains the writer best able to articulate
 the sense of cosmic mystery as well as to indicate the nature of possible higher-order
 intelligences, or superminds, without failing into either naive bravura, or will
 to power. Van Vogt, who, with his assorted slans, silkies, nexialists, etc. can
 be relied on for an operatic, mystificatory demonstration of the will to power,
 has described in his short story "Process" 7 a forest-mind
 that is slow-thinking, yet fast-growing, a ravening leviathan of hostility, yet
 slothful and stupid, a forest replete with contradictions which visiting
 spacemen (who remain invisible) insert their impervious ship into, from time
 immemorial, to steal some riches (in the form of uranium) and fly away. This
 story, by contrast with Le Guin, is unconscious metaphor. The tangled,
 fearsome, stupid forest "reads" quite blatantly as the hidden,
 unconscious area of the mind, into which the masterful creative consciousness
 plunges—well-armoured—to extract necessary wealth; and the story remains an
 absorbing one, for all its contradictions, precisely because it is about the
 process of creation, and at the same time about Van Vogt's own willful refusal
 to be analytically aware of this. The story is about the betrayal of full
 consciousness. 
 Van Vogt's short story "The Harmonizer" a describes a supertree
 which angrily manufactures a stupefying perfume whenever its "sensitive
 colloids" catch "the blasts of palpable lust" radiated by any
 killer—whether carnivorous animal, or hate-drunk soldier. Such trees,
 deposited on Earth by a space-wreck, are responsible for the disappearance of
 the dinosaurs. Latterly, their one survivor, re-emerging after 80 million years,
 halts World War III, introducing a malign, brainwashing pseudo-pacifism. This
 time, the tree is overtly associated with the militant spread of a form of
 consciousness. A similar manipulatory—though paranormal—situation occurs in
 Kris Neville's short story "The Forest of Zil," 9 where a
 world-forest responds to Terran intrusion by retrospectively cancelling the time-line
 of Homo Sapiens, sending a creeping ontological amnesia back along the time
 axis. Manipulatory, too, is the symbiotic diamond wood forest in James H.
 Schmitz's short story "Balanced Ecology." 10 It too
 encapsulates both violence and somnolence—twin associations which link these
 four stories, suggesting that the subconscious, the time of sleep, is indeed
 underlying these various tree-minds in one form or another, and that the time of
 sleep, furthermore—when dreams take place—is feared as a time of ignorance
 and violence. This can certainly not be said of Stapledon's treatment of the
 theme—nor of Le Guin's. 
 Theme and image, event and illusion, bind Le Guin's two forest-mind stories
 together. The title of "Vaster Than Empires and More Slow" is but one
 of a series of references to the work of Andrew Marvell, especially his poem
 "To His Coy Mistress": "My vegetable love should grow/Vaster than
 empires, and more slow." Another allusion to this same poem occurs at the
 end of the story ("Had we but world enough and time...") while another
 familiar line from the poem presides over Lyubov's headache in WWF: "...ow,
 ow, ow, above the right ear I always hear Time's winged chariot hurrying near,
 for the Athsheans had burned Smith Camp..." (§3). Again, in VTE, Osen's
 reflecting that the vegetation of World 4470 is "one big green
 thought" echoes the famous "a green thought in a green shade"
 from Marvell's poem "The Garden." 
 The second story also picks up the military argot of WWF where Colonel
 Davidson is obsessed with the idea of people going "spla"—crazy. Osden uses the word more than once of the effect the forest is producing; while
 the comment that "the chitinous rigidity of military discipline was quite
 inapplicable to these teams of Mad Scientists" recalls the behavior of the
 Terran military on Athshe, at the same time as it turns it upside-down. 
 The hallucinatory quality of Athshe—a world "that made you day-dream"
 (§1)—recurs in the "Hypnotic quality" of the woods of VTE World
 4470, where imagery binding root and dream is reinforced. The woods are dark,
 connected; nightmare passes through the roots as the visitors are sensed; the
 visitors themselves relapse increasingly into sleep, to dream dreams that are
 "pathless" and "dark-branching." When awake, the visitors
 are still scared "blind." The path leading Osden to his self-sacrifice
 commences with a fall in the forest that injures his face, and lets his blood
 mingle with the root-nerves. Thereafter his countenance is "flayed" by
 scars that parallel the injured face of Selver the Athshean, beaten up by
 Colonel Davidson. But Selver, the flayed one, becomes thereby a "God"
 in Athshean terms—dreamer of a powerful new collective dream. Osden, too,
 through psychic identification with the "immortal mindless" forest—an
 idiot God absorbed in its own Nirvana beyond Maya, the changes of the world—transcends
 the human level, and at the same time becomes a "colonist" of World
 4470. This word, the very last of the story, would seem an odd choice indeed for
 Osden's fate as castaway did it not reflect back to the Terran ambition to
 colonize Athshe—which the Terrans signally fail to achieve, precisely because
 of their disconnectedness. Osden succeeds where they failed; but only in a
 mystic apotheosis achieved by a paranormal "wild talent"—a fictive
 dimension ruled out of court by the politically conscious, this-worldly
 "boss" of WWF, and henceforth to be purged from the Hainish universe
 of Le Guin. 
 However, it is apparent from this story that there is an authentic
 "mystical" strain in Le Guin—an authentic strain, as opposed to the
 various gimmick-ridden mystifications that frequently pass for mysticism in our
 times, from the conjuring tricks of Uri Geller or the "grokking" of
 Charles Manson, via the musico-hagiology of the pop Orient, to the opening of
 the third eye of confused Western disciples by cult gurus. Whether this
 authentic mystical strain is necessarily radically at odds with the socio-political
 strain, as metaphor may be at odds with verisimilitude, is another matter. It
 might be truer to say that this mystic element has hitherto been falsely
 expressed through the traditional paranormal gimmickry of SF and that it is here
 in the process of breaking free (though it is not yet free). Just as The
 Lathe of Heaven is discharging the tension generated by use of the
 paranormal in the Hainish cycle, so VTE, structurally attached as it is to the
 politically "correct" partner story presided over by the
 "boss," may be seen now as an attempt to discover a permissible locale
 for the mystical—stripped, as it were, of a phoney mysticism of supermen and
 superminds. Hence the caginess as to whether Osden's empathy is paranormal or
 not; hence the need to remark on this and draw the problem to our attention. 
 The story opens (in the original version at least) 11 with a
 meditation on the nature of eternity as experienced during NAFAL time-distortion
 starflight, which is directly compared to the time, outside time, of dreams:
 "The mystic is a rare bird, and the nearest most people get to God in
 paradoxical time is...prayer for release," comments Le Guin, coining a
 phrase clearly suggested by the "paradoxical sleep" of the dream
 researchers. 12 The story ends with a return to this same keynote
 mood. Osden is absorbed into the eternity, the no-time sought by those rare
 birds, the mystics: 

 He had taken the fear into himself, and accepting had transcended it. He
 had given up his self to the alien, an unreserved surrender, that left no
 place for evil. He had learned the love of the Other, and thereby had been
 given his whole self. But this is not the vocabulary of reason. 

 The final sentence is revealing. Le Guin has inverted the main values of WWF
 to give suppressed material a verisimilar outlet. She has swung as far away as
 possible from the military domain into the realm of the "speshes"
 (specialists). Dream has become nightmare, and sleep a form of catatonic
 withdrawal from reality. She has made her visitors to the stars overtly mad. She
 has created an alien life-form—as opposed to the various humanoids of Hainish
 descent, that have been her theme hitherto. 13 She has pushed beyond
 the limits of Hainish expansion to describe a world that has nothing to do with
 Hain. Forest as metaphor of mind has here been translated into narrative
 reality. The grudging military surrender of the Terrans on Athshe has become the
 "unreserved" spiritual surrender of Osden, who thus becomes the only
 true colonist: not so much of World 4470—for how can one man colonize a world?
 —as of the Beyond, of the dream time ( pace Raj Lyubov's shade stalking
 Selver's dreams). Yet, in the end, this transcendent territory is unchartable by
 rational discourse. Stripped to the bare minimum of the paranormal trappings
 that do duty for it elsewhere (however successfully—one thinks of Genly Ai's
 encounter with Foretelling in The Left Hand of Darkness , §5), it is
 inarticulable. Or rather, to draw a distinction that Wittgenstein draws, it may
 be shown forth, but not stated. The ending of VTE recalls the terminal aphorism
 of the Tractatus : "What we cannot speak about we must pass over in
 silence." 14 The essentially silent world-forest of VTE shows
 forth, yet cannot state, the para-rational elements implied by WWF though
 sternly suppressed in that story. 
 It might seem, then, that whilst the mystic area of experience may be an
 authentic area, there is nothing profound one can say about it. Least of all
 should one attempt to do so by invoking the paraphernalia of the paranormal from
 the lumber-room of SF, for this only alienates one from the physical—and from
 the social—universe. 15 Yet the sense of insight into the infinite
 is not thereby necessarily lost. It returns, in The Dispossessed , with
 Shevek's creation of a General Theory of Time—within a context of positive
 social, political and emotional practice. It returns, having been chastened by
 the "boss" of WWF, and then by contrast—in the partner story VTE—allowed
 free rein to test out the mystic Pascalian silences where the vocabulary of
 reason becomes void. To the world-forests of these two stories, both metaphors
 for mind—one overt, one covert—corresponds Shevek's Theory: which is, within
 the verisimilar setting of the book, also metaphorical to a large extent.
 Yet, whereas the forest-mind is presented as something concrete that lies in
 wait out there for us, Shevek's Theory arises only out of the complex dialectic
 of his own life as scientist and utopian. As he discovers his own unity, so his
 theory becomes possible; and only so. This is the vocabulary of reason—which
 turns out to have far greater scope and depth than that other vocabulary, of
 unreason, or parareason. But it is a vocabulary of a subversive reason,
 which has therefore had first to pass through the false, non-reasonable and by
 themselves non-cognitive expressions of parareason. The two forest minds of WWF
 and VTE are—beyond their intrinsic interest as bases for two shrewd and
 powerful stories—necessary stages in a development from ur-SF to the mystico-political
 theory of time and society in The Dispossessed . 
 NOTES 
 1. The pithy apothegm of Tacitus ( Agricola §30)—"They make
 desolation and they call it peace" ("ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem
 appellant")—is worked into the texture of the story "Vaster Than
 Empires and More Slow," in ironic reference to the alienation of the
 characters: "They were misfits among men, and what they saw there was not
 desolation, but peace." 
 2. Joe W. Haldeman, The Forever War (1975). Appearing originally as
 separate stories in Analog , the episodes drew such acclaim as "a
 fine and realistic look at the Future...reveals the keen eye of a complete
 science fiction author who looks at the future as a different place with
 different configurations" (from the editorial epigraph to "We are Very
 Happy," anthologized in Best SF 73 , ed. H. Harrison & Brian W.
 Aldiss [1974]). 
 3. For a discussion of conscious dreaming, see the present writer in SFS
 2(1975):75. In addition to the Senoi dreamers of Malaya discussed there,
 comparison might also be made with the Iroquois who attached an overriding
 importance to dreams, dream interpretation and dream fulfillment, and indeed
 practiced a form of psychoanalysis—though the practical consequences were not
 always as benign and pacific as those of Senoi dream analysis. See A.F.C.
 Wallace, "Dreams and the Wishes of the Soul: A Type of Psychoanalytic
 Theory among the Seventeenth Century Iroquois," American Anthropologist 
 60(1958):234-48. 
 4. The "drug crisis" in the US forces in Vietnam was qualitatively
 different from the alcoholic intoxication characteristic of conquering armies,
 insofar as (1) the use of drugs was associated with the ethos of a newsworthy
 sector of the antiwar protest movement, in a radically different sense from
 drunkenness being the perennial common soldier's protest at authority; (2) the
 feedback of drugs (heroin not hallucinogens) and drug addicts to the mother
 country was one factor, albeit a minor one, in eroding the national will to
 continue fighting; and (3) drug addiction within the American army eroded
 military discipline and efficiency in a way that alcoholic indulgence could not
 possibly have done. 
 5. The story, in the New Dimensions version, is dated "during the
 earliest decade of the League," but also "Before the invention of the
 instantaneous transmitter," which is inconsistent (cf. the table in SF
 2[1975]:74); however, this is reconciled in the version in The Wind's Twelve
 Quarters (1975). 
 6. In Henry James, The Better Sort (1903). 
 7. Collected in The Far-Out Worlds of A.E. Van Vogt (1968). 
 8. Collected in A.E. Van Vogt, Away and Beyond (1963). 
 9. In H. Harrison & Brian Aldiss, The Year's Best Science Fiction No.
 1 (1968). 
 10. In Anthony Cheetham, Bug-Eye Monsters (1974). 
 11. The version included in The Wind's Twelve Quarters omits the first
 4 paragraphs, i.e. all mention of mystics and paradoxical time. 
 12. Cf SFS 2(1975):70, 75 n. 9. 
 13. At the same time, in The Lathe of Heaven (1971) Le Guin was
 experimenting with "dream-time" aliens from Aldebaran as a verisimilar
 mediator for mystical/pararational experience. A curious coincidence of names
 links Lathe to WWF, also: the central character of Lathe , George
 Orr—the dreamer of alternatives, as his name bespeaks—and Mr. Or, the Cetian
 emissary in WWF share names, if not roles or personalities. It is interesting,
 too, to note that the military of WWF are deliberately contrasted with the
 "Mad Scientists" of VTE—while the archetypal Mad Scientist erupts in
 Lathe in the figure of Dr. Haber, associated with irrational solutions to
 the world's woes. 
 14. Ludwig Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus , new transl.
 by D.F. Pears & B.F. McGuinness (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961),
 prop. 7. 
 15. SFS 2 (1975):73 n. 3, for further discussion. 

 ABSTRACT 
 Out of an original impulse to write about forest and
 dream, Le Guin imagines in "The Word for World is Forest" (WWF) a world-forest
 that—while non-sentient itself—nevertheless functions metaphorically as mind, as
 the collective unconscious mind of the Athsheans. The story, however, is also oriented
 politically and ecologically: there is a surplus of energy and idea attached to the
 central image of a forest-consciousness that does not find a full outlet. The
 "forest-mind" theme, controlled and tempered by politics and ecology in WWF,
 finds its independent outlet only within a paranormal context in another long story of
 this period, "Vaster than Empires and More Slow" (VTE). The two stories are
 closely linked thematically—the latter involving a general inversion of the plot of
 the former. If Le Guin’s The Lathe of Heaven represents a discharge of
 paranormal elements built into the framework of the Hainish cycle, then, outside that
 cycle, VTE represents a parallel working out of a conflict between verisimilitude and
 metaphor in WWF. The world-forests of these two stories, both metaphors for mind,
 correspond to Shevek’s General Theory of Time in The Dispossessed . Yet whereas
 the forest-mind is presented as something concrete that lies in wait out there for us,
 Shevek’s theory arises out the complex dialectic of his own life as scientist and
 utopian. As he discovers his own unity, his theory becomes possible. This is the
 vocabulary of reason, which Le Guin’s fiction shows to have a far greater scope than
 that other vocabulary of unreason or parareason. In the case of The Dispossessed ,
 Le Guin uses a vocabulary of subversive reason, which has had to pass through the false,
 non-reasonable, non-cognitive expressions of parareason. The two forest-minds of WWF and
 VTE are, then, beyond their intrinsic interest, necessary stages in a development from SF
 to the mystico-political theory of time and society in The Dispossessed. 

 Back
 to Home 

 