 
 Book review: George R.R. Martin’s “A Dance with Dragons” - The Washington Post 
 Print Subscription 
 Mobile 
 Conversations 
 Today's Paper 
 Going Out Guide 
 Jobs 
 Cars 
 Real Estate 
 Rentals 
 Classifieds 
 Home 
 Politics 
 Campaign 2012
 Congress
 Courts &
 Law 
 The Fed Page 
 Health Care 
 Polling
 White House
 Who Runs Gov 
 Blogs & Columns 
 Top Blogs 
 The Fix | Chris Cillizza 
 2chambers | Felicia Sonmez 
 Federal Eye | Ed O’Keefe 
 Fact Checker | Glenn Kessler 
 Opinions 
 All Opinions 
 PostPartisan 
 Left-Leaning 
 Right-Leaning 
 Toles
 Cartoons
 Telnaes
 Animations 
 Local 
 Columnist Index 
 Local 
 DC: 
 Politics 
 | News 
 MD: 
 Politics 
 | Communities 
 VA: 
 Politics 
 | Communities 
 Crime
 Education
 Obituaries
 Traffic & Commuting
 Weather
 Blogs & Columns
 Special Reports
 Top Blogs 
 State of NoVa | Did ex-lover extort Loudoun embezzler? 
 The Answer Sheet | SpongeBob SquarePants talks education 
 Going Out Gurus | NYC’s Boqueria coming to Dupont 
 The Buzz | Assign the intern 
 Sports 
 Redskins/NFL 
 Capitals/NHL 
 Wizards/NBA 
 Nationals/MLB 
 DC United/Soccer 
 Colleges 
 AllMetSports 
 Other Sports 
 Blogs & Columns 
 Top Blogs 
 Capitals Insider| Katie Carrera 
 Nationals Journal| Adam Kilgore 
 Soccer Insider| Steven Goff 
 The Insider| Mike Jones 
 National 
 Corrections 
 Energy & Environment 
 Health & Science 
 Higher Education 
 National Security 
 On Faith
 On Leadership 
 Innovations 
 Blogs & Columns 
 Top Blogs 
 Ideas@Innovations 
 Post Leadership 
 Under God 
 @innovations 
 World 
 Africa
 The
 Americas 
 Asia &
 Pacific 
 Europe
 Middle East
 National Security 
 War Zones
 Special Reports 
 Business 
 Economy
 Industries 
 Local Business 
 Markets 
 Policy
 &
 Regulation 
 Technology
 World
 Business 
 Blogs & Columns 
 Innovations 
 Special Reports 
 Top Blogs 
 Ezra Klein 
 Post Tech | Cecilia Kang 
 Faster Forward 
 Political Economy 
 Investigations 
 Lifestyle 
 Advice
 Carolyn Hax
 Food
 Home & Garden
 Style
 Travel
 Weddings
 Wellness
 Blogs & Columns 
 KidsPost 
 Top Blogs 
 On Parenting | Janice D’Arcy 
 Arts Post | Jacqueline Trescott 
 The Checkup | Jennifer LaRue Huget & Rob Stein 
 All We Can Eat | Food section 
 Entertainment 
 Books 
 Celebrities 
 Comics
 Going Out Guide 
 Horoscopes 
 Movies 
 Museums
 Puzzles
 Theater & Dance 
 TV
 Top Blogs 
 Reliable Source | Roxanne Roberts & Amy Argetsinger 
 TV Column | Lisa de Moraes 
 Celebritology | Jen Chaney 
 Click Track | Chris Richards & David Malitz 
 Multimedia 
 Innovations 
 Photos
 Videos
 The Washington Post 
 The Washington Post 
 Books 
 Celebrities 
 Comics
 Going Out Guide 
 Horoscopes 
 Movies 
 Museums
 Music
 Puzzles
 Theater & Dance 
 TV
 Blogs & Columns 
 In the News 
 Medal of Honor 
 Netflix 
 Debt ceiling 
 MLB All-Star Game 
 Jewel 
 ‘A Dance with Dragons’ worth the long long wait 
 Text Size 
 Print 
 E-mail 
 Reprints 
 By Bill Sheehan, 
 By any measure, George R.R. Martin’s “ A Dance With Dragons ” is one of the Big Books of the summer , and it comes to us trailing a host of outsize expectations. 
 This massive fantasy is the fifth installment in a projected seven-volume epic titled “ A Song of Ice and Fire .” The popularity of the series — powerfully augmented by the recent HBO adaptation of the opening volume, “ A Game of Thrones ” — has increased exponentially from one book to the next. It’s safe to say that no work of fantasy has generated such anticipation since Harry Potter ’s final duel with Voldemort. Adding to the pre-publication furor is the fact that the most recent entry, “ A Feast for Crows ,” appeared way back in 2005. This gap has fueled a flood of carping and sometimes vicious Internet commentary from an assortment of disgruntled readers. 
 Loading... 
 Comments 
 Weigh In 
 Corrections? 
 (Bantam Books) - ‘’A Dance with Dragons: A Song of Ice and Fire: Book Five’’ by George R. R. Martin. 
 More on this Story 
 Martin's fifth installment is what fantasy should be 
 HBO’s ‘Game of Thrones’: A lot to sword out 
 HBO orders second season of ‘Game of Thrones’ 
 Get the latest Entertainment news 
 Well, those impatient souls can finally take a breath. “A Dance With Dragons,” all 1,000 pages of it, is now in bookstores, nearly six years after its predecessor. And it was worth the wait. The “Song of Ice and Fire” series is a hugely expansive narrative set in a variety of physical locales and told through an array of constantly shifting perspectives. The principal setting for all five novels is the continent of Westeros, home to a group of formerly independent realms that have coalesced into a loosely united entity called the Seven Kingdoms. To the east, across the Narrow Sea, lie a variety of colorful desert cultures featuring, among other elements, a thriving slave trade. To the north, a vast wall 700feet high separates the Kingdoms from a haunted, impenetrable forest and from the various terrors, human and Other, that live within it. A prominent feature of life in the Kingdoms is the protracted nature of the seasons, which can last for years at a time. As the narrative begins, a long, deceptively peaceful summer is coming to an end. And, as the characters repeatedly remind us, “Winter is coming.” The plots and counterplots that drive this mammoth enterprise take place against a complex backdrop of history, legend and myth. The most recent and relevant historical drama concerns Robert Baratheon’s revolt against the mad King Aerys Targaryen. After successfully deposing the king and scattering or killing most of the Targaryen family, Robert ascends the Iron Throne and finds, as so many kings before him, that power exacts a very steep price. Dissolute and increasingly uninterested in the practical difficulties of running a kingdom, Robert commissions the only man he can trust — Eddard Stark, Lord of Winterfell — to serve as “Hand of the King,” setting in motion a chain of events with enormous and tragic consequences. As readers (and viewers) of “A Game of Thrones” already know, Robert dies in what may or may not be a hunting accident, paving the way for a power struggle that forms the centerpiece of the series. A handful of contenders stake their claims to the Iron Throne, throwing the realm into chaos and affecting the lives of every major character in this densely populated saga. And there really are a staggering number of characters, many of whom disappear from view for long stretches. “A Dance With Dragons” brings back several prominent figures who have not been seen directly since “ A Storm of Swords ” appeared in 2000. The most welcome of these is Tyrion Lannister, the sardonic dwarf who is perhaps Martin’s most vivid creation. Following a notorious act of parricide, Tyrion flees the Seven Kingdoms and travels to the east, where he hopes to offer his services to the exiled Daenerys Targaryen. Daenerys, sole surviving descendant of the deposed King Aerys and legitimate contender for the Iron Throne, currently holds court in the remote kingdom of Meereen, surrounded by enemies and accompanied by a trio of dragons. Other returning figures include Jon Snow, illegitimate son of Eddard Stark and newly appointed commander of the Night’s Watch, which guards the Northern Wall; the devious and beleaguered Cersei, widow of King Robert; the dour, humorless Stannis Baratheon, Robert’s brother and self-proclaimed heir; and literally dozens of others. All of them play their large and small roles in the ongoing game of thrones. And all of them are vulnerable. Any player, however important, can be removed from the board at any moment. This simple fact lends a welcome sense of uncertainty to the proceedings and helps keep the level of suspense consistently high throughout. Filled with vividly rendered set pieces, unexpected turnings, assorted cliffhangers and moments of appalling cruelty, “A Dance With Dragons” is epic fantasy as it should be written: passionate, compelling, convincingly detailed and thoroughly imagined. Despite a number of overtly fantastic elements (dragons, seers, shape shifters and sorcerers), the book — and the series as a whole — feels grounded in the brutal reality of medieval times and has more in common with the Wars of the Roses than it does with “The Lord of the Rings.” The result is a complex summer blockbuster with brains and heart, a book with rare — and potentially enormous — appeal. 
 Sheehan is the author of “At the Foot of the Story Tree: An Inquiry Into the Fiction of Peter Straub.” 
 Email Tumblr 
 Reddit 
 Stumbleupon 
 Digg 
 Delicious 
 LinkedIn 
 ???initialComments:true! pubdate:07/12/2011 00:11 EDT! commentPeriod:3! commentEndDate:7/15/11 12:11 EDT! currentDate:7/12/11 10:5 EDT! allowComments:true! displayComments:false! 
 Weigh In 
 Discussion Policy 
 About Discussions, Badges 
 Newest first 
 Oldest first 
 Most Recommended first 
 SuperFan 
 SuperFan badge holders consistently post smart, timely comments about Washington area sports and teams. 
 If your comments or those of another user measure up, please let Post editors know . 
 Get a badge Nominate someone for a badge 
 Fact Checker 
 Fact Checkers contribute questions, information and facts to The Fact Checker . 
 If your comments or those of another user measure up, please let Post editors know . 
 Get a badge Nominate someone for a badge 
 Washingtologist 
 Washingtologists consistently post thought provoking, timely comments on events, communities, and trends in the Washington area. 
 If your comments or those of another user measure up, please let Post editors know . 
 Get a badge Nominate someone for a badge 
 Post Writer 
 This commenter is a Washington Post editor, reporter or producer. 
 Post Forum 
 Post Forum members consistently offer thought provoking, timely comments on politics, national and international affairs. 
 If your comments or those of another user measure up, please let Post editors know . 
 Get a badge Nominate someone for a badge 
 Post Recommended 
 Washington Post reporters or editors recommend this comment or reader post. 
 You must be logged in to report a comment. 
 Sign in here 
 You must be logged in to recommend a comment. 
 Sign in here 
 Comments our editors find particularly useful or relevant are displayed in Top Comments , as are comments by users with these badges: . Replies to those posts appear here, as well as posts by staff writers. All comments are posted in the All Comments tab. 
 More about badges Get a badge 
 To pause and restart automatic updates, click "Live" or "Paused". If paused, you'll be notified of the number of additional comments that have come in. 
 Comments our editors find particularly useful or relevant are displayed in Top Comments , as are comments by users with these badges: . Replies to those posts appear here, as well as posts by staff writers. 
 + SHARE THIS DEBATE 
 Slate 
 Slate V: Bronies: Is That A Thing? 
 Will climate change make the planet more humid, or just hotter? 
 Amazon sales tax: The company's position on state sales tax is unfair and unethical. 
 Network News 
 Hide this 
 Most Popular 
 Friends' Activity 
 Most Popular 
 Most Tweeted 
 Twitter Activity 
 Most Popular Right Now 
 Your Friends’ Most Recent Activity 
 Follow The Post: 
 Facebook 
 Twitter 
 View More Activity 
 "> 
 The Post Most: Entertainment Most-viewed stories,videos, and galleries in the past two hours 
 Most Popular 
 Jewel and Ty Murray welcome baby boy, name him Kase Townes 
 In Zooey Deschanel feud, L.A. Times writer sticks to her guns 
 Paul Rudd to star as man who freezes people 
 Nancy Pelosi sends birthday flowers to George W. Bush 
 Prince William and Kate meet Reese Witherspoon at Tusk Trust reception (Photos) 
 Top Videos 
 Will and Kate mingle with Hollywood elite 
 Bam Margera mourns death of Ryan Dunn 
 Night lives: Rony Alay, laundromat night attendant 
 Bizarre break-in at Ed Sullivan Theater 
 An "Afternoon Delight" performance 
 Top Galleries 
 Eye on entertainment 
 Will and Kate visit U.S. on the royal tour 
 Prince William and Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge: After the royal wedding 
 Prince Albert of Monaco marries former swimmer Charlene Wittstock 
 The man behind Bachmann 
 Entertainment Newsletters 
 Sign-up for e-mail newsletters and alerts and get the news you need delivered directly to your inbox. 
 Going Out Guide: Dinner & Drinks 
 Going Out Guide: With The Kids 
 Going Out Guide 
 Movies 
 See all Washington Post Newsletters 
 Live Discussions 
 Earlier Today 
 11:00 AM 
 ComPost Live with Alexandra Petri 
 11:00 AM 
 Tuesdays with Moron: Chatological Humor Update 
 12:00 PM 
 Lunchline Live: Michelle Obama at Shake Shack, Pepco on the hot seat (video) 
 12:30 PM 
 Debt talk negotiations and News of the World's demise: Brad Hirschfield's ethical take on the news (Video) 
 1:00 PM 
 Eugene Robinson: Republicans to blame for debt impasse 
 2:00 PM 
 What Ahmed Wali Karzai's assassination means for Afghanistan 
 Weekly schedule, past shows 
 Connect with Entertainment 
 Facebook: Friend us on Facebook! 
 Facebook: Friend us on Facebook! 
 Twitter: Follow us on Twitter! 
 RSS: Subscribe to our RSS feeds 
 Alerts: Sign up for news alerts 
 Mobile: Entertainment on the go 
 App Store: View our iPhone applications 
 Featured Advertiser Links Oil Spill , Mesothelioma Class Action , Fosamax Fracture , Asbestos & Veterans , Depakote Side Effects >> Topamax Side Effects , Mesothelioma Treatment , Yaz Blood Clot , Asbestos cancer , Actos , Mesothelioma Symptoms >> Join Pres. Obama. It's time to do it again. >> Are you in? Join Barack Obama's campaign now. >> Help Pres. Obama keep moving America forward. >> Join the 2012 campaign at BarackObama.com >> Looking to buy a home? Visit TWP Real Estate section for the latest open houses. >> Make Your Vanguard Investing More Profitable - Free Research Report Reveals Best & Worst Funds >> 
 Entertainment Links 
 Books 
 Celebrities 
 Comics
 Going Out Guide 
 Horoscopes 
 Movies 
 Museums
 Music
 Puzzles
 Theater & Dance 
 TV
 Blogs & Columns 
 Ways you can get us 
 Mobile 
 Apps 
 Newsletter & alerts 
 RSS 
 Post Store 
 Facebook 
 Photo Store 
 Twitter 
 Washington Post Live 
 The Washington Post 
 About Us 
 Work for us 
 Community Relations 
 PostPoints 
 Corrections/Suggestions 
 Archive 
 Contact the Ombudsman 
 Report a problem 
 Web site 
 Make us your homepage 
 Newspaper 
 Subscribe 
 Home delivery service 
 e-Replica 
 Advertise 
 In the newspaper 
 On the web site 
 Mobile 
 Events 
 The Washington Post Company 
 Post Company web sites 
 Partners 
 Slate 
 Who Runs Gov 
 Express Night Out 
 Captial Business 
 El Tiempo Latino 
 The Root 
 Foreign Policy 
 Trove 
 Post Tickets 
 Capitol Deal 
 Service Alley 
 Post Master Class 
 WP Live 
 Student Advisory 
 © 1996- The Washington Post 
 User Agreement and Privacy Policy 
 Rights and Permissions 
 Help 
 Contact Us 
 Ad Choices 
 