 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 Medievalism in English Canadian Identity and Literature - Arc Humanities Press 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 

 


 
 Skip to content 
 
 
 
 



 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 


 

 


 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 


 
 
 

 
 
 
 About 
 
 Column 
 
 Meet the Team 

 Contact Us 

 Business Details 

 Press Endorsements 

 


 


 Browse 
 
 Column 
 
 Books 

 Journals 

 Book Series 

 Authors A-Z 

 Stocklist 2026 

 


 


 Information 
 
 Column 
 
 Ordering 

 eBooks and Accessibility Statement 

 Reviews in Journals 

 Legal Deposit 

 Exam Copies 

 Members Page 

 Data Privacy Policy 

 General Product Safety (GPSR) 

 


 


 For Authors 
 
 Column 
 
 Submissions 

 Style Guide 

 Editing Services 

 The Publishing Process 

 Contract FAQs 
 
 Author Agreement FAQs 

 Copyright 

 


 Author Discounts 

 


 


 Open Access 
 
 Column 
 
 Open Book Collective Initiative 

 Open Book Collective Reports 

 New Voices Open Access Awards 

 ANZAMEMS-Arc Book Prizes 

 Books Available in Open Access 

 


 


 News & Media 
 
 Column 
 
 Charles D. Wright’s Medieval Studies Bibliographies 

 The Arc Blog 

 Join our Mailing List 

 Newsletter Archive 

 YouTube 

 Twitter 

 Facebook 

 


 


 CARMEN 
 
 Column 
 
 About 

 Upcoming Meeting 

 Past Meetings 

 Project Prize 

 


 


 
 

 
 
 Close Menu 

 
 
 SEARCH 
 
 

 
 

 


 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Books

 
 

 
 Authors

 
 

 
 Journals

 
 

 
 On The Site

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Home 
 

 
 
 Arc Medievalist 
 

 
 
 literary criticism 
 


 
 
 social science 
 


 
 
 history 
 


 Medievalism in English Canadian Identity and Literature

 
 


 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 


 
 

 Medievalism in English Canadian Identity and Literature

 by M. J. Toswell 
 Series: Arc Medievalist

 
 272 Pages , Trim size: 6 x 9 in

 

 
 
 Hardcover


 
 9781802702675


 
 Published: 2025-08-31


 

 
 
 
 
 $175.00 

 
 £134.00 

 

 


 
 
 
 
 North America

 
 


 
 
 
 Rest Of World

 
 


 

 

 
 


 

 
 
 eBook (PDF)


 
 9781802703696


 
 Published: 2025-08-31


 

 
 
 
 
 $175.00 

 
 £134.00 

 

 


 
 

 

 
 
 
 Buy the ebook 
 i 
 
 

 


 

 
 
 eBook (ePub)


 
 9781802703689


 
 Published: 2025-08-31


 

 
 
 
 
 $175.00 

 
 £134.00 

 

 


 
 

 

 
 
 
 Buy the ebook 
 i 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 


 
 
 
 
 
 Description 
 

 
 Contents 
 

 
 Authors 
 

 
 
 
 Canada has a deep layer of medievalism embedded in its architecture, governance structures, and sociocultural bedrock. This volume distinguishes between Canadian medievalism and its closest neighbours, British and American medievalism, and argues that the ignored or unnoticed medievalism of English Canada derives from its foundation by United Empire Loyalists escaping to the north in the late eighteenth century.

 The book considers particular literary and cultural expressions of medievalism—including Gothic architecture, heraldry, ice hockey, and Samuel de Champlain’s lost astrolabe; and the work of Guy Gavriel Kay, Earle Birney, Robertson Davies, Louise Penny, Alice Munro, Margaret Atwood, and George Longmore—arguing that medievalism remains a potent force in Canadian national identity.
 

 

 
 
 List of Illustrations

 Preface and Acknowledgements

 Introduction

 Chapter 1. Four Case Studies in Material Culture

 Chapter 2. Roots and Branches: Medievalism, Scholarship, History

 Chapter 3. Historical Fantasy: Guy Gavriel Kay

 Chapter 4. Two Twentieth-Century Titans: Earle Birney and Robertson Davies

 Chapter 5. Translations of Beowulf 

 Chapter 6. The Medieval Modern in Canada Today

 Conclusion

 Select Bibliography

 Index
 

 

 
 
 M. J. Toswell is Professor of English at the University of Western Ontario. A lifelong addict of governance, serving many roles both in the academic field and outside it, she currently serves on both Senate and the Board of Governors at Western. She publishes on Old English, manuscript codicology, and medievalism.
 

 

 


 
 
 More books from Arc

 
 
 Previous slide in More books from Arc carousel 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 Next slide in More books from Arc carousel 
 

 

 

 






 



 



 
 Stay Connected
 
 
 
 
 


 
 

 

 
 
 
 © 2026 Arc Humanities. All Rights Reserved. 


 
 
 14 Clifton Moor Business Village, James Nicolson Link, York YO30 4XG, United Kingdom 

 

 
 Powered by Supadu 


 



 


 

 

 

 
 We use cookies on our website to give you the most relevant experience by remembering your preferences and repeat visits. By clicking “Accept All”, you consent to the use of ALL the cookies. However, you may visit "Cookie Settings" to provide a controlled consent.
 Cookie Settings Accept All 

 
 Manage consent 
 
 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Privacy Overview
 
 This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may affect your browsing experience.

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 Necessary 
 
 
 Necessary 
 

 Always Enabled 
 

 
 
 
 Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. These cookies ensure basic functionalities and security features of the website, anonymously.
 Cookie Duration Description cookielawinfo-checkbox-analytics 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Analytics". cookielawinfo-checkbox-functional 11 months The cookie is set by GDPR cookie consent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Functional". cookielawinfo-checkbox-necessary 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookies is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Necessary". cookielawinfo-checkbox-others 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Other. cookielawinfo-checkbox-performance 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Performance". viewed_cookie_policy 11 months The cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Consent plugin and is used to store whether or not user has consented to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Functional 
 
 
 Functional 
 

 

 
 
 
 Functional cookies help to perform certain functionalities like sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedbacks, and other third-party features.
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Performance 
 
 
 Performance 
 

 

 
 
 
 Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indexes of the website which helps in delivering a better user experience for the visitors.
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Analytics 
 
 
 Analytics 
 

 

 
 
 
 Analytical cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help provide information on metrics the number of visitors, bounce rate, traffic source, etc.
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 

 

 
 
 
 Advertisement cookies are used to provide visitors with relevant ads and marketing campaigns. These cookies track visitors across websites and collect information to provide customized ads.
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 Others 
 
 
 Others 
 

 

 
 
 
 Other uncategorized cookies are those that are being analyzed and have not been classified into a category as yet.
 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 SAVE & ACCEPT 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
