Lone Peak Book Club 

 Subscribe Sign in 

 "Assassin's Apprentice" by Robin Hobb

 Book 7 of Mythic Realms

 Elliot 

 Nov 09, 2025 

 2

 Share

 Published in: 1995 
 Plot: A royal bastard named Fitz is raised in the shadows of the Six Duchies’ court after being abandoned as a child. Trained in the deadly arts of espionage and assassination by the enigmatic Chade, Fitz learns to navigate the treacherous politics of the kingdom while secretly possessing a magical bond with animals called the Wit. As he grows, Fitz must choose between loyalty to his king and the dangerous power stirring within him—a conflict that will define his fate. 
 Trivia: The Dutch symphonic metal band Within Temptation drew inspiration from Assassin’s Apprentice for their song “Hand of Sorrow” on The Heart of Everything . A decade later, the British group Kitchen Party also looked to the novel, channeling it into their 2013 single “Fitz’s Poem. 

 This week looked a little different for our discussion. Our discussion leader wasn’t able to make class, but did pass along his thoughts and questions regarding Assassin’s Apprentice . So I’ve written those below. Many people in the group didn’t finish the book, so we didn’t have a lot to discuss. Below are the leader’s thoughts: 

 This was a great fantasy novel. (It is really weird typing those words). The story was gripping, I became really invested in the Fitz and Burrich friendship.😁

 Scene: I enjoyed the Lady Patience, Lacey, Fitz scene on page 223 when she gave him the puppy. The anxiety in Patience dealing with her husband’ s child was well supported. A lesser woman might have blamed Fitz for Chivalrys downfall but she rose above it (as much as she could). Lacey acted as the Patience ‘higher self’ and it felt very cozy and real. While Fitz suffered from an inability to bond, this is expected with his constant abondonments, his being tossed around to ‘authority’ figures often and his confusion with the Wit and the Skill.

 Quote: Page 103. Shrewd speaking “ It was my idea. Not his. He never approved of it. I insisted......(im short on time) Ending with... “ On that you have a King’s word.” The author captured an adult, running the Duchies trying to explain to a young, confused man that the buck stopped with him. The test almost broke Fitzs heart. At least the King owned it. Long live King Schrewd.

 Questions: Did Regal mean to tell Fitz his power required Burrich’s strength? Did anyone realize Fitz needed Burrich and their shared wit for Fitz to kick b*tt at Skill? Will Fitz find Molly in the next book and will she be married?

 Have you read the book? What did you think?

 Due to my work schedule, our final discussion will be on Thursday, December 4th. We’ll be talking about The Talisman and The Changeling . So stay tuned for those! And we may even have our theme for the next book club ready to announce as well. Hope you’re reading something good. 

 Take care, 
 E. 

 If you would like to read The Buried Giant, here are some links: 

 Penguin 

 Amazon 

 IndieBound 

 Libro.FM 

 2

 Share

 Discussion about this post

 Comments Restacks 

 Top Latest Discussions 

 No posts

 Ready for more?

 Subscribe 

 © 2026 Elliot · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice 

 Start your Substack Get the app 

 Substack is the home for great culture