Skip to content 

 The Book Nook 

 Menu 
 Home 

 Book Reviews 
 
 Author Index 

 Fantasy 

 Sci-Fi 

 Non-fiction 

 Fiction 

 Crime 

 Middle Grade 

 Wyrd And Wonder 
 
 Spooktastic Reads 

 Monthly Updates 

 About Me 

 Realm of the Elderlings: A Series Review

 Published on September 3, 2023 September 3, 2023 by azucchi 

 This is a long and meandering posts talking about all 16 books of the Realm of the Elderlings. It will contain some spoilers, though I will try to avoid any major ones, but I think the people who will appreciate this post will be those with some knowledge of Hobb’s writing, as I will not be doing in depth summaries of the individual books. 

 Hello dear readers, it has been a few months since my last post… the last stage of my pregnancy was tiring and I now have a beautiful baby girl to fill my time! Despite that, I am still reading and still thinking about books, and since April my main obsession has been Robin Hobb’s writing, and as of the last day of August I have completed all 16 books set in her Realm of the Elderlings world! I have said before on this blog that I couldn’t get through the first Farseer trilogy because I struggled to witness the hardships that Fitz goes through, but then I felt the urge to reread the Liveship Traders trilogy, and her world and characters were so addictive that I had to experience more of it, and I decided to push through. 

 I think the main thing that made me revisit Assassin’s Apprentice was the moment I realised that the character of Amber in the Liveship Traders is also the Fool of the Assassin’s series. This made me want to know more about the Fool and what might have happened before he made his way to Bingtown, and so I returned to hear FitzChivalry’s story… this post will probably be somewhat meandering because I have a lot of thoughts and feelings about these books, but I do want to try and talk about each self contained series a little while reflecting on the works as a complete unit, so bear with me! 

 The Liveship Traders

 Series Summary:

 The Liveship Trader’s Trilogy takes place in Jamaillia, Bingtown and the Pirate Isles, on the coast far to the south of the Six Duchies. The war in the north has interrupted the trade that is the lifeblood of Bingtown, and the Liveship Traders have fallen on hard times despite their magic sentient ships. At one time, possession of a Liveship, constructed of magical wizard wood, guaranteed a Trader’s family prosperity. Only a Liveship can brave the dangers of the Rain Wild River and trade with the legendary Rain Wild Traders and their mysterious magical goods, plundered from the enigmatic Elderling ruins. Althea Vestrit expects her families to adhere to tradition, and pass the family Liveship on to her when it quickens at the death of her father. Instead, the Vivacia goes to her sister Keffria and her scheming Chalcedean husband Kyle. The proud Liveship becomes a transport vessel for the despised but highly profitable slave trade.

Althea, cast out on her own, resolves to make her own way in the world and somehow regain control of her family’s living ship. Her old shipmate Brashen Trell, the enigmatic woodcarver Amber and the Paragon, the notorious mad Liveship are the only allies she can rally to her cause. Pirates, a slave rebellion, migrating sea serpents and a newly hatched dragon are but a few of the obstacles she must face on her way to discovering that Liveships are not, perhaps, what they seem to be, and may have dreams of their own to follow.

 I’m going to start with the Liveship Traders trilogy because it’s the first one I read and has influenced how I viewed the wider world that Hobb created. I remember the first time I read this series about 7-8 years ago feeling both mesmerised and frustrated by it. Robin Hobb has a tendency towards exposition and lingering within a character’s thought processes, occasionally repeating things that have already been said or implied. And in this series, where the character perspectives are numerous and intersect, it could be somewhat frustrating, especially when you know that one or more people have miscommunicated or misunderstood one another. I spent much time mentally yelling at Althea and Brashen to JUST TALK TO EACH OTHER! 

 The second time around I found it less frustrating, because despite having forgotten the fine details of the story, I knew the shape of it and could appreciate the way that Hobb took me through it. My two favourite things about this series – and Hobb does this throughout her writing – is the slow reveal of the truth about the Liveship sand wizardwood, and the way in which she shows competency in characters. I loved watching Althea grow in her competency as a sailor, but most especially I loved how Ronica and Keffria Vestrit took on their roles as Traders and brought order back to Bingtown after chaos and war erupts. With Ronica especially I loved watching someone be so good at what they do, mainly creating order and open communication among multiple groups of people. There is something really appealing about the Trader way and how everything is a negotiation and a conversation. 

 The Liveship Traders trilogy is the only one in which Hobb doesn’t include an excerpt of world building at the start of each chapter, having instead brief perspectives from sea serpents at intermittent points. And so despite the occasional reference to the Red Ship Wars between the Six Duchies and the OutIslanders and other political events, it is the series with the least connection to the wider events in the world, so I can see how I was able to read it and then feel no need to explore further. 

 If you wanted more specific thoughts on these books, I did a review of each back in May: Ship of Magic | The Mad Ship | Ship of Destiny . 

 The Farseer Trilogy 

 Series Summary:

 Set in and around the fictional realm of the Six Duchies, it tells the story of FitzChivalry Farseer (known as Fitz), an illegitimate son of a prince who is trained as an assassin. Political machinations within the royal family threaten his life, and the kingdom is beset by naval raids. Fitz possesses two forms of magic: the telepathic Skill that runs in the royal line, and the socially despised Wit that enables bonding with animals. The series follows his life as he seeks to restore stability to the kingdom.

 Both times I picked up Assassin’s Apprentice I was transfixed by it. I loved the excerpts at the start of each chapter describing some aspect of Six Duchies history or culture, and the prologue that frames the narrative as Fitz telling his story. Fitz’ voice is strong from the beginning, and he is immediately likeable. Burrich, too, comes in strong and keeps the story grounded. Where the Liveship Traders trilogy starts with a relative amount of action, all of Fitz’s books have a meandering beginning to them, as he slowly unravels and remembers the part of his life he is describing. Hobb does an excellent job of setting the scene, and especially on my second read I picked up so many details that she includes on clothing, customs, politics, and architecture. 

 For almost half the first book there is no obvious plot other than Fitz’s growth and learning, but the court of Buckkeep is intriguing enough, and characters like Chade and the Fool bring mystery, while Regal and Galen’s animosity fuels the tensions. I enjoyed watching the culmination of Fitz’s training on his journey to the Mountain Kingdom, despite how things conclude, and I especially loved the setting of the Mountain Kingdom and the way its society functions. And of course, we get to meet Kettricken, one of the best characters throughout the series! She is too pure for this world…

 Royal Assassin was harder, and defeated me the first time once everything starts going wrong with Fitz in the second half. I was definitely kept intrigued by the Red Ship Raiders and wanted to know where they had come from and what the secret to Forging was, but Fitz’ torment by the Skill Coterie and his uncle Regal became far too much. I also disliked the plot with Molly, because I hate anything centred around misunderstandings. I do like Molly though, and will talk about her more later… But I got through it on my second attempt, and can appreciate its place in Fitz’s arc and narrative. Plus, his wolf Nighteyes is worth reading for. 

 What I enjoyed most about the conclusion of the trilogy, Assassin’s Quest, is the way I had no idea what the plot would bring. In fact, all three of the Assassin trilogies have this knack for ending so far from where I could have imagined when starting the first book. It made for some good page-turning whenever I reached the halfway mark. 

 The Tawny Man Trilogy

 Series Summary:

 The Tawny Man Trilogy is the third series in the Realm of the Elderlings. Set over 15 years after the end of the Red Ship Wars, it continues the story of FitzChilvary Farseer and revisits many characters from The Farseer Trilogy. Introduced in this trilogy are Prince Dutiful Farseer and the Outisland Narcheska Elliania. 

 Returning to Fitz’s world was strange; I had missed him, but worried that because of his self-appointed exile from Buckkeep I would miss the supporting characters that make his story more interesting. Fitz, after all, is loveable but very bad at making decisions. But luckily for me we were reunited with many families faces, with the Fool in his new guise as Lord Golden, Chade in his newly public role, and Kettricken doing her utmost as queen. I was initially uncertain about the newly introduced characters, especially the young prince Dutiful, and the ‘simpleton’ Thick, but they soon grow into their own and round out the story.

 In fact, Hobb has a talent for introducing new people and making them feel rounded and well placed in the story. I think her series has the perfect balance of familiar faces to ease the new ones in. I think I missed Burrich most of all, and Fitz’s agony at never being able to tell either him or Molly that he is still alive paints a lot of this series. I don’t want to talk too much about this element of the plot because of spoiling things, but I hadn’t realised what a strong presence Burrich was throughout the first trilogy, and how glad I was to see him in glimpses in the first two books and then more solidly in the last one. I read somewhere that he was initially the intended main character of the Farseer story, but that Fitz quickly took over in Hobb’s mind, and I can see how strong he still was in the storytelling. 

 What I loved in this series was that, when Fitz returns to Buckkeep under the guise of Tom Badgerlock, he deepens his (and the reader’s) knowledge of court politics. We get to see the full extent of Chade’s hidden tunnels and all the little things he’s always putting in motion. I also enjoyed the way both the magics of the Wit and the Skill are further developed and explained. I always thought it was such a shame that by the end of the Farseer Trilogy no true Skill-users are left and most of the writings are lost. I am glad that Hobb takes this further and shows a kingdom rebuilding itself with the magic and trade that it had neglected. A bit like the Bingtown negotiations, Kettricken’s honest way of ruling and cementing alliances within the Six Duchies and beyond is really satisfying to watch. Competency is always attractive, and Hobb has a lot of competent characters for me to enjoy. 

 As I mentioned with the Farseer Trilogy, the plot of the Tawny Man trilogy went way off track of anything I could have imagined. From thinking that the entire conflict would come from the group of Witted calling themselves the Piebalds that kidnap the prince in the first book, the story expands far beyond that and takes the characters all the way to the OutIslands in search of a fabled black dragon. I love that every series in the Elderlings world comes back to dragons in the end.

 The Rain Wild Chronicles

 Series Summary:

 The series is set in the Rain Wilds, a forested region where people live in houses built in the branches of trees. Below the trees runs the Rain Wild river, whose acidic waters make the region inhospitable; disfigurement and scaly skin are commonly experienced by the residents of the region. As the series begins, a set of dragon eggs given to the people hatch, but the dragons turn out to be stunted, with ill-formed wings, and are unable to fly. A group of dragon keepers is tasked with transporting the eggs to a mythical, long-lost city: Kelsingra, the ancient home of dragons and their servants, the Elderlings.

 And speaking of dragons, here is a series fully focused on them! Kelsingra is a city that has been glimpsed in previous series; Fitz accidentally travels there in Assassin’s Quest when he touches a portal stone, and the dragon Tintaglia visits the city in Ship of Destiny in her search for any remaining dragons or Elderlings. I was very keen to have a series set there. 

 The Elderlings have slowly been revealed over the course of previous books, first as mystical and all-powerful beings that Verity goes in search of in the Farseer Trilogy, then as an ancient advanced civilisation that fell to disaster in the Liveship Traders trilogy, expanding their reach to further than anyone first thought, as revealed in the Tawny Man trilogy. In the Rain Wild Chronicles we get to see how Elderlings first came to be, and how they can return to the world through the presence of dragons. I won’t say too much more than that! 

 As I’ve said, I love dragons and I was very curious about Kelsingra, so I was fully expecting this to be my favourite series. I’d seen others say it was theirs. However, I did struggle with it at times. First of all, it has a fully new cast of characters, with only an early cameo by the Paragon and his crew to bring familiarity. Even starting in Bingtown with the character of Alise, we do not really see any of the familiar faces from that setting. Hobb does a lot of set-up work, though, introducing first the serpents that will become the dragons, then the three main human points of view: Leftrin, the captain of a river boat, Thymara, a Rain Wilder with a lot more obvious changes than most, and Alise, a plain Bingtown woman who believes herself destined for spinsterhood but is offered an unlikely marriage. We get to see all three around the time of the dragons hatching, and how it touches each of their lives, before the story jumps forward a few years. 

 While I was a bit frustrated at the slow pace while reading Dragon Keeper , I realise that without the build up of setting and characters I would not have been able to connect with this new cast. As it was, I struggled with Thymara and the way most of her plot from the middle of the book onwards seemed to be about whether she would sleep with one of the other keepers. The series as a whole had a very strong focus on the pairing up of people, with half the cast being in a couple by the end, and drama unfolding from at least three of those. I don’t mind romance, and can sometimes love it in my fantasy, but I wanted to know about the dragons and the secrets of the Elderlings! When it comes time for a reread of Hobb’s writing, the Rain Wild Chronicles are possibly the only ones I wouldn’t pick up again, though I won’t say that with certainty, because I may enjoy it more the second time around… 

 What I did enjoy was the way each chapter started with correspondence between the bird keepers of Trehaug and Bingtown, which gives glimpses of the politics and events occurring in the wider world. It was a clever way to keep the rest of the world turning in the readers’ minds while keeping the story focused solely on the dragons’ journey to Kelsingra. And I will say that, as with the other series, I enjoyed the conclusion and felt it fitted nicely and that it showcases one of my favourite things about Hobb’s endings: she rarely shows the action of any great battle or conflict, preferring to jump to the aftermath and the consequences of it. I’m sure for readers who love an action or battle sequence this is a bit of a turn off, but I found I really enjoyed it! 

 The Fitz and the Fool Trilogy

 Series Summary: 

 The Fitz and the Fool trilogy is the concluding subseries of the Realm of the Elderlings , It features the protagonist FitzChivalry Farseer in his fifties, and follows his life with his wife Molly and daughter Bee Farseer, and the events that erupt in their lives at the return of the Fool.

 This is possibly the one I will have to be most vague about, because I really don’t want to spoil it for anyone. I was both eager and reluctant to pick up Fool’s Assassin because I missed Fitz and the Six Duchies, but had also left him in a relatively good place at the end of the last series and knew that any new story could only bring more disruption and tragedy to his life. 

 I won’t talk about the plot much, but will say that this trilogy is really the culmination of all Hobb’s writing, and pulls threads from all of her series to make something truly special. Though there is a lot of pain and torment for many of her characters, I can’t help but love this trilogy the most. There is a further deepening of the politics and connections within the world, and a satisfying development of the Skill magic and the way it’s used in the kingdom. It was satisfying to see Nettle and Dutiful interacting in the world as adults after seeing them last as teenagers, and I had the happiest moment of reading when Fitz is finally accepted and acknowledged as a Farseer in front of everyone. I never thought it would happen, and it genuinely made me cry. 

 There were so many moments in this series that made me realise the full extend of Hobb’s writing prowess, because things that I had thought simply little worldbuilding details or throwaway references never to be expanded upon become crucial to the story. The Fool’s references to his old school and their knowledge of the future seemed like it would forever stay a mystery, and yet in this trilogy all becomes exposed and I loved it. There is so much of character development and world development here to fully satisfy the reader. Even the ancient fate of the dragons and Elderlings, another thing I thought would remain unexplained, gets expanded upon. I also noticed most in this series the way that early moments in the book, where it seems that Hobb is simply throwing in random details of description, always come back to have some relevance and I enjoyed looking out for those as I read. 

 The conclusion of this trilogy, and the series as a whole, has left me feeling somewhat empty but I think the way things ended was perfect for Fitz’s arc and definitely felt satisfying. One could always wish for more stories in the world of the Elderlings, and perhaps there is some scope for them, but there is also a sense of finality I wouldn’t change. I am glad in many ways to have finished it all, because it means I can move on to other stories without feeling the tug of Hobb’s writing on my mind, but I know that it won’t be too long before I revisit the pages of her books and lose myself once more in her writing. I will say that if anyone wants to start a podcast with me about this series I would 100% be down for that. 

 Have you read any or all of these books? What are your thoughts? 

 Share this:

 Share on X (Opens in new window) 
 X 

 Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) 
 Facebook 

 Like Loading... 

 Related 

 Categories Book Reviews , Fantasy , Series Review • Tags assassin's apprentice , assassin’s fate , assassin’s quest , blood of dragons , city of dragons , dragon haven , Fitz and the fool , fool’s assassin , fool’s errand , fool’s fate , fool’s quest , realm of the Elderlings , robin hobb , royal assassin , Series Review , Ship of Destiny , ship of magic , the dragon keeper , the Farseer trilogy , the golden fool , the Liveship traders , The Mad Ship , the rain wild chronicles , the tawny man trilogy 

 Post navigation

 Previous Wyrd & Wonder Quest Log: The Final Week 

 Next The Firsts of 2023 Book Tag 

 10 thoughts on “ Realm of the Elderlings: A Series Review ” 

 calypte says: 

 September 3, 2023 at 5:20 pm 

 I started with the Assassins books, and they remain some of my top fantasy *ever*. I am well overdue a reread – and a finish! I got really bogged down in the Rain Wilds (hah!), and never went back. I should!

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Reply 

 azucchi says: 

 September 3, 2023 at 5:36 pm 

 Yes the Rain Wilds got a bit slow! But I highly recommend finishing the assassin books 

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Reply 

 Zezee says: 

 September 4, 2023 at 10:15 am 

 I love this series and enjoyed reading your thoughts on them. Like you, I too felt empty when all done with it. Empty and wrung out too because of all the emotional ups and downs the story takes us through. I didn’t struggle with the first Farseer books as much, but I had a hard time getting into the Liveship Traders ones. It took me A LONG TIME to realize that the serpents were narrating too (those chapters were so confusing at first) and I too was annoyed at the characters at times and at lingering in their thoughts and the repetitions. I love that the Fool is the connecting thread throughout the subseries and loved him as Lord Golden, lol, because he’s so stylish then. I didn’t know Burrich was the intended protag at first. That’s very interesting. Have you read Wilful Princess and Piebald Prince? It’s a prequel of sorts that I recommend. It’s about how the Wit became taboo. Also Hobb has a book of short stories under this and the Megan Lindholm pseudonym in which there’s a short story about the first folks to settle in the Rain Wilds. The Rain Wilds is such an interesting place, but the Rain Wild Chronicles is my least liked of the subseries. It was often a frustrating read because I didn’t like being stuck in Thymara’s thoughts, though I think I’d be more considerate on a reread. Anyway, sorry for the long comment, but I can go on and on about this series.

And congrats on your having a wonderful baby girl!

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Reply 

 azucchi says: 

 September 4, 2023 at 4:04 pm 

 Don’t apologise for the long comment, I love it! I could also go on and on, so if you ever feel like discussing it more let me know 😊 I have thought of looking at Hobb’s other writing under that name and Megan Lindholm, and I may pick those up soon! 

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Reply 

 Zezee says: 

 September 5, 2023 at 3:37 am 

 Oh man! I’d be up for discussing it more because Hobb’s world is so interesting and the characters complex.

Also, Hobb may be writing another book set in the world but focused on Bee (she mentioned something like that on her FB).

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 azucchi says: 

 September 7, 2023 at 8:13 am 

 Oh that would be good! I’d love to see Bee grow up more! I think if and when there is more official news about that I will definitely action my plan of doing a reread and discuss it in podcast or blog format, so you’d be welcome to join me! (I would be down to do it anyway but it’s always nice to build up to something) 

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Zezee says: 

 September 11, 2023 at 1:28 am 

 Oh I’d totally be up for something like that, podcast or otherwise, for a reread.

I started a reread once but didn’t finish. I’d like to because on my first read I remember thinking Chade’s apprentice poisoned him and that’s why he died… but I can’t remember what led me to think that.

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Pingback: Review: Sea of Souls by N. C. Scrimgeour – The Book Nook 

 Annemieke says: 

 September 17, 2023 at 11:23 am 

 I still haven’t gotten around to the Rain Wild Chronicles and the last fitz arc. Hobb always manages to destroy me and I’m not sure I can do that right now haha

 Like Liked by 1 person 

 Reply 

 Pingback: Quarterly Check-In: September 2023 – The Book Nook 

 Leave a comment Cancel reply 

 Δ 

 Blog at WordPress.com. 

 Privacy & Cookies: This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this website, you agree to their use. 

To find out more, including how to control cookies, see here:
 
 Cookie Policy 

 Comment 

 Reblog 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 The Book Nook 

 Join 189 other subscribers

 Sign me up 

 Already have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. 

 The Book Nook 

 Subscribe 

 Subscribed 

 Sign up 

 Log in 

 Copy shortlink 

 Report this content 

 View post in Reader 

 Manage subscriptions 

 Collapse this bar 

 Loading Comments... 

 Write a Comment... 

 Email (Required) 

 Name (Required) 

 Website 

 %d 

 Design a site like this with WordPress.com

 Get started